"Wound management",
"Given accurate approximation of the wound edges, and freedom from infection and haematoma, epidermal healing of a wound occurs extremely rapidly, but the healing processes which go on in the dermis are much more prolonged and, as far as the ultimate appearance of the resulting scar is concerned, much more important. The transition from fibrin, formed between the two surfaces of the wound as the first stage of healing, through the phase of diminishing reaction, to the quiescent relatively avascular scar takes place slowly over a period of months.",
"Early on, the scar tends to be red and the imme- diate surroundings are indurated. Gradually the induration and redness diminish and disappear, leaving a soft scar, generally paler than the sur- rounding skin. The degree of redness and indura- tion is extremely variable, as is the time taken for the reaction to subside. The appearance of a scar can be expected to improve for a year and more.",
"This gradually diminishing induration consti- tutes normal progress to quiescence, but such a sequence is not invariable. Instead, the fibrous tissue of the dermis may become hypertrophic giving rise clinically to a raised, red, hypertro- phic scar or, when the reaction is more florid, to a keloid scar. These conditions are discussed in Chapter 6.",
"The tensile strength of the wound gradually increases during the healing phase. The sutures take what little strain there is until they are removed, and if the scar is going to stretch there- after it does so gradually over the next few weeks. Support of the wound for as long as is feasible appears to have little effect. A scar is more likely",
"to stretch badly when there is obvious wound tension, but often stretching occurs when there is no apparent tension other than that deriving from the normal elasticity of the skin.",
"Nevertheless in many parts of the body the direction of the scar appears to influence the amount of stretching which takes place, and in certain body sites the directions which result in minimal stretching can be systematised into lines of election for scars.",
"In the face and neck, the lines of election lie at right angles to the direction of the resultant pull of the muscles of facial expression. With the loss of elasticity that goes with ageing they become set into a pattern of wrinkles (Fig. 1.1). In the vicinity of theflexures, the lines of election are par- allel to the skin creases which are clearly present in the region of the flexure. In the skin surfaces between the flexures, the evidence for a specific line of election is less clear cut, and the placing of an incision there is determined more often by considerations other than the eventual appear- ance of the scar.",
"There is great and uncontrollable individual variation in healing characteristics. Examples of factors beyond the surgeon's control are the age of the patient, the site and often the direc- tion of the wound or incision. Scars in children generally remain harder and redder for longer than in the adult, and the end result is poorer, this quite apart from the greater tendency of scars in children than in adults to develop hypertrophic change or even keloid. One of the compensations of age is the fact that the more wrinkled the skin the more rapidly a scar settles and the better is its final appearance, hidden amongst the wrinkles.",
"4 FUNDAMENTAL TECHNIQUES OF PLASTIC SURGERY",
"Fig. 1.1 The lines of election for the placing of scars in the face and neck, indicated by the pattern of wrinkling of the skin, and their relation to the line of the underlying muscles of facial expression.",
"Scars also behave very differently in different individuals and different parts of the body. Outside the face and neck, scars are apt to stay conspicuous despite careful surgical technique, and stretching even of the most meticulously handled incision is frequent. In the face too, different sites and different skins vary greatly in the way they behave. Coarse, oily skin tends to produce more than the usual reaction to sutures and suture marks are more common as a result. The problem arises most strikingly in the nose where the skin can be very thick, with active sebaceous glands, most markedly towards the tip. In hairless skin sites, such as the red margin of the lips and the palms and soles, scars are usually less conspicuous. Probably the best example of the influence of site is the upper ster- nal area where scars almost always become keloid.",
"These unavoidable factors may set a limit to what can be achieved by pure surgical technique, but it to produce the best result in a given set of cir- cumstances a meticulous technique is essential. It must also be emphasised that failure in a single aspect may be enough to give a poor result.",
"is true nonetheless that",
"PLACING THE SCAR",
"Use of natural lines Incisions should be placed wherever possible so that the scar will lie in a line of election, or at least parallel to it (Fig. 1.I), so that in the course of time it will settle in to look like another wrinkle. Even if wrinkling is not actually pres- ent, the site and line of the wrinkles likely to develop in the future can often be found by getting the patient to simulate the appropriate facial expression, e.g. smiling, frowning, closing the eyelids tightly, etc. This brings the more obvious potential wrinkle lines into being.",
"The most generally useful wrinkles are the nasolabial fold, the glabellar wrinkle pattern, the lateral canthal 'craw's foot', the forehead wrinkles, each a site which overlies one of the main con- centrations of the muscles of facial expression. Where these are absent, as over the masseter, the wrinkle pattern is less clear cut, and in the ear and nasal tip it is completely lacking.",
"In the older patient, additional wrinkling results from the effect of gravity on a back- ground of skin slackness. In many ageing faces the criss-cross of fine wrinkling is a mixture of gravity wrinkling and expression lines.",
"The smooth skin of the child can make it extremely difficult, especially away from the eyes and mouth, to select the best line for an incision. Fortunately, the need to make the choice is rare.",
"The use of a natural junction line has the effect of distracting the eye from a scar and can be used to good effect. Examples are the junction lines between nose andface especially around the the nostril rim, the margin base of the ala, between the red border of the lip and the skin, the junction line between the ear and the masseteric region, and in the lower eyelid just below the line of the eyelashes. These and others are used routinely to distract the eye of the observer and render the scar less conspicuous.",
"Placing the scar where it will not be visible The obvious examples are inside the hairline or in the eyebrow. In these sites the incision, instead of being perpendicular to the skin surface, should be made parallel to the hair follicles. This avoids the creation of the hairless scar line which results from sectioning of the hair follicles. A practical point to note in making a scalp incision is the possibility of subsequent baldness reveal- ing a scar previously hidden. In this, account should be taken of the patient's sex, and any hereditary factors in the potential pattern of baldness.",
"Use of the Z.plasty The Z-plasty has a potentially significant role as an adjunct to other methods designed to improve the appearance of scars. The technical aspects of design are described in Chapter 2, but the general point to be made at this juncture is that the Z-plasty is unsuitable for use in the ini- tial management of a wound resulting from trauma. It should be reserved for possible use in subsequent scar revision, and even then it calls for careful judgment, skill in design, and scrupu- lous technique.",
"PREPARATION OF THE WOUND",
"The presence or absence of damaged tissue determines whether or not a wound needs to be",
"WOUND MANAGEMENT 5",
"excised. It is axiomatic that all dirt and other for- eign material must be removed, and when the dirt is ingrained this may entail the vigorous use of a sharp spoon or wire brush to ensure tha t removal is demonstrably complete. The apparent coarseness of the methods involved may seem inappropriate, but total removal of grit and dirt at this stage takes priority.",
"Excisional policy Where the cosmetic result is of paramount importance, as in the face, a conservative policy to excision of wound margins is desirable, only obviously non-viable tissue being removed, the limited objective being to replace structures in their normal position and suture them there. This policy is particularly necessary in the more extensive wounds (Fig. 1.2). It recognises that an optimum result cannot be expected from the healing of such a wound, and accepts at the out- set the probable need for subsequent revisional surgery. It also permits the salvage of tissue whose viability is felt to be in doubt, and which might otherwise be excised, tissue which may be of considerable value later.",
"It is often important to know when a piece of traumatised tissue is viable and should be con- served or whether it should be excised. The deci- sion is made on the basis of evidence of an active circulation. The relevant signs are the presence of blanching of the skin on pressure with return of the original colour on release, and the presence of bleeding from the cut edge of the tissue con- cerned. Where there is doubt, the anatomy of the region and its known vascularity, together with the size and content of the pedicle, help in mak- ing a decision (Fig. 1.3). The problem arises most acutely in the face, ear and scalp. The vascularity of these sites is on the side of survival, and flaps with even a small pedicle should not be excised lightly.",
"In the case of the scalp and the ear, the poss- ibility exists of a totally detached flap being replanted using microvascular techniques, but for success immediate referral to a Unit with the necessary expertise is essential.",
"Quite apart from its use in judging viability in the context of trauma, skin colour. has to be assessed frequently and accurately in most plastic",
"6 FUNDAMENTAL TECHNIQUES OF PLASTIC SURGERY",
"Fig. 1.2 Examples of the conservative treatment of severe soft tissue injuries of the face involving the eyelids, nose and mouth, where there has been no skin loss, showing the results of accurate tissue replacement with careful matching.",
"surgical procedures, and for this reason the agents chosen for skin cleansing and sterilisation should be ones which do not stain the skin or tissues. Satisfactory from this point of view are cetrimide and an aqueous solution of chlor- hexidine (Hibitane).",
"Wound closure In suturing an irregular wound the secret lies in looking first for landmarks on either side to match. With two points which definitely fit the jigsaw sutured together, fall into place until enough key points have been matched to allow the intervening sutures to be placed readily. Time spent fitting a jigsaw of tissue accurately at the time of original suture is never wasted. The chance comes only once, and",
"fresh parts of",
"if it is missed the results can be difficult to cor- rect. As already stressed, it may be apparent that Z-plasties will be required later, but these should not be used at the primary operation.",
"When tissue has been lost the governing prin- ciple is that surviving tissues should be replaced in their correct position so that the defect can be properly displayed and assessed in terms of the tissues lost. The experienced plastic surgeon might then consider the possibility of a definitive primary reconstruction, though probably only to discard the thought. The less experienced sur- geon should certainly have a more modest target and, if the defect cannot be closed directly with- out creating distortion, he should apply a split skin graft in most instances. Such an approach",
"Fig. 1.3 Survival and non-survival of traumatic flaps in the face. treated conservatively. A. B Flaps before suture, showing the extent of the injury. C Survival and non-survival of flaps. o The late result prior to reconstruction of the ala of the nose.",
"WOUND MANAGEMENT 7",
"8 FUNDAMENTAL TECHNIQUES OF PLASTIC SURGERY",
"has the merit of allowing healing to occur quick- ly with minimal scarring and leaves conditions suitable for a definitive repair or reconstruction subsequently.",
"Ideally, wound edges being sutured together should be vertical if the best scar result is to be achieved, and accurate suturing is also very much easier when the faces of tissue brought together are of the same thickness. In the case of facial injuries, particularly those resulting from windscreen trauma, neither may be present, shelv- ing lacerations being the norm. A compromise",
"from the ideal situation is then unavoidable. Excision to create vertical wound margins would involve unacceptable sacrifice of viable tissue in many instances, and then only sufficient of the wound edges is excised to remove clearly devi- talised tissue. The residual shelving makes suturing more difficult, but it has to be accepted as the lesser of two evils. In practice the best result is achieved by using a large number of very fine sutures, and even then the need for possible revision or dermabrasion of the result- ing scar subsequently has to be accepted.",
"Fig. 1.4 Tattooed scarring - the result of failure to remove ingrained dirt and grit from the wound at the time of primary treatment.",
"Fig. 1.5 material left in position for too long.",
"Suture marks resulting from the use of coarse suture",
"Irregularities of the eyelid and the mouth - the result of Fig. 1.6 failure to suture matching points together accurately at the time of the initial treatment.",
"WOUND MANAGEMENT 9",
"Errors in wound management The common errors made in trea ting facial wounds at this stage are failure to remove all dirt from the wound, creation of a scar with gross suture marks, and failure to suture the various woundedges in the precise position which they occupied relative to oneanother before the injury.",
"The effect of failure to remove all dirt from the wound is to leave foci of tattooed scarring in the dermis (Fig. 1.4). These are always difficult, and often impossible, to eradicate completely later once healing has taken place. Suture marks along the line of a scar result from the use of coarse suture material and/or failure to remove sutures sufficiently early, allowing the sutures to cut into the tissues. The coarser the suture material the broader and more obtrusive is the linear scar which it creates (Fig. 1.5). Such marks are virtu- ally impossible to eradicate subsequently. Failure to suture the wound margins in the position which they occupied prior to the injury leaves irregularities (Fig. 1.6), which are especially obvi- ous when the lip margin, eyelid, eyebrow or nostril have been imperfectly matched.",
"Use of undercutting When the presence of tension adds to the diffi- culty of wound closure, the use of undercutting of the wound margins to allow a degree of advancement is frequently recommended. Before this can even be considered the vascular state of the skin has to be assessed, and the potential effect of tension on its viability, particularly if the injury has involved an element of degloving. Personal experience has been that the amount of advancement achieved in practice is often disappointingly small.",
"The levels at which such undercutting is car- ried out and its safe extent vary in the different body sites (Fig. 1.7). In the face, the appropriate level is deep to the dermis, so that the plexus of subdermal vessels is included, while leaving undisturbed the branches of the facial nerve. The potential for advancement of facial skin depends very much on the degree of redundancy which was present previously. In the child, there is an absence of skin redundancy, and the potential is virtually nil; in the ageing wrinkled face, it is considerable. In the scalp, the plane is between",
"10 FUNDAMENTAL TECHNIQUES OF PLASTIC SUR.GERY",
"Face",
"Undermining with scalpel",
"Level of undermining",
"Undermining with scissors",
"Limbs and Trunk",
"Fig. 1.7 The levels,and the methods used. in undermining in the face. limbs and trunk, and scalp.",
"the galea aponeurotica and the pericranium, and the vascular anatomy of the scalp is such that extensive undercutting can be carried out with safety. The galea rather than the skin is respons- ible for the inextensibility of the scalp, and it is multiple galeaI 'relaxation' incisions which have been advocated to increase the amount of advancement. Experience indicates that the effectiveness of this manoeuvre has been greatly exaggerated. In the limbs and trunk, if undercut- ting is to be more than minimal, the plane between the superficial and deep fascia should be used.",
"Surgeons vary greatly in the extent to which they make use of undercutting in this way, but if more than minimal advancement is required to allow a wound to be closed, it is probably wiser to close the defect with a split skin graft.",
"STITCHCRAFT",
"becomes an extremely precise procedure, prefer- ably using the instrumental method of suture tying (Fig. 1.8). The necessarily small needles and fine suture materials make tying by hand clumsy and difficult. Instrumental tying allows the tension of the suture to be regulated, and knot placement to be carried out with much greater finesse, precision and expedition.",
"The more a wound is traumatised in the process of suturing the less good is the cosmetic result likely to be and the implements used for holding wound margins steady for suturing should be as atraumatic as possible. The skin hook may cause minimal trauma to the wound margins, but it is difficult to use with elegance and speed, and dissecting forceps are more rou- tinely used. Individual preference will decide whether the toothed or non-toothed variety is used. The decision is immaterial as long as both are used with due regard to the trauma they are causing.",
"When the surgeon is aiming to make his scar as inconspicuous as possible suturing of the wound",
"The aim is to produce an accurately and atraum- atically coapted wound, and the technique of",
"Fig. 1.8",
"Instrumental tying of a suture.",
"handling and suturing is merely a means to this end. First-time accurate placing of the suture is a habit to acquire. The second attempt is all too often worse than the first, and only results in a moth-eaten wound edge and poor scar.",
"The needles used are curved and move most readily in a circle. The wrist must therefore be rotated as part of the movement involved so that insertion of the needle and its pull-through are in the line of its curve (Fig. 1.9). Slight oedema of the wound tends to develop for a short time after a wound is sutured and allowance should be made for it in tying the suture. The correct suture tension just avoids blanching the skin held by the suture. Tied too tightly, the suture cuts in more rapidly and is more likely to leave a suture mark.",
"Sutures may be interrupted or continuous. When the cosmetic result is all-important inter- rupted sutures are used, but continuous sutures are often adequate in other circumstances.",
"Interrupted sutures The standard suture is the simple loop suture (Fig. 1.10). It consists of a simple loop knotted at one or other side of the wound, and aims to bring the",
"WOUND MANAGEMENT II",
"Pull-through of needle",
"Fig. 1.9 curve of the needle.",
"Insertion and pull-through of a needle in the line of the",
"12 FUNDAMENTAL TECHNIQUES OF PLASTIC SURGERY",
"Equal bite is the 'coarse adjustment'",
"Placing the knot as a 'fine adjustment'",
"Insufficient deep bite producing inversion and dead space",
"Unequal bite producing poor apposition of the wound edges",
"Fig. 1.10 The simple loop suture.",
"Fig. 1.11 Evertingthe wound edge with a skin hook before inserting the needle. and the path of the curved needle through the skin.",
"skin edges together accurately with no overlap- ping of one margin. A general tendency towards the suture line helps to slight eversion of ensure complete dermal apposition. It also makes sure that inversion of the wound edges, which generally results in a poorer scar, is avoided.",
"The suture should include at least the entire thickness of the dermis, and the needle should take an equal bite of each side. The taking of an equal bite can be viewed as the 'coarse adjust- ment' of getting the wound edges level. One or other edge may remain a little lower than its",
"Fig. 1.12 The use of the thumb to evert the skin during the insertion of a suture.",
"fellow, and it can be raised to match the levels of the two edges by manipulating the knot in tying to that side of the wound. Each suture has an optimal sidefor its knot, and its manipulation is the fine adjustment'.",
"The desired degree of wound eversion is achieved in several ways. The taking of a slightly greater bite by the needle of its deeper part, dermis or fat, has the effect of approximating the entire face of the wound edge and creates a degree of eversion. The wound edges are also sometimes undermined for 2-4 mm and held everted as the needle is inserted, allowing its path to take the desirable greater deep bite. As already indicated a skin hook can be used to hold the wound edge everted (Fig. 1.11), though dissecting forceps are more usual. The side of the thumb can also be used effectively to evert the skin during the insertion of the needle (Fig. 1.12). As a rule it is technically easier to suture from the more mobile side of the wound to the more fixed side.",
"Where the skin is thin and poorly supported, or mobile on its deep surface, e.g. around the eyelids, it is particularly difficult to avoid inver- sion, and a solution may be to use the vertical mattress suture (Fig. 1.13). This suture has no greater tendency to leave suture marks than any other if it is not tied too tightly and is removed early, and if the superficial bite is minimal the tendency to invert is corrected.",
"When there is no tension of the wound, inter- rupted sutures alone are adequate. When there is an element of tension, the use of buried absorbable",
"WOUND MANAGEMENT",
"Vertical mattress suture",
"Buried absorbable suture with knot placed deeply",
"Continuous intradermal suture",
"'Blanket stitch'",
"Fig. 1.13 Commonly used types of skin suture.",
"sutures (Fig. 1.13), or a continuous intradermal suture (Fig. 1.13), is described with the aim of allowing early removal of skin sutures without wound disruption or stretching.",
"Surgeons vary in the extent to which they use buried absorbable sutures to close the skin in layers, as opposed to relying on a single layer of skin sutures. The similarity in the results obtained by surgeons using both techniques would indicate that the routine use of layered closure is not strictly necessary. The method probably has its real value when it is used to eliminate dead space, and prevent haematoma.",
"The use of a continuous intradermal suture to diffuse wound tension has the merit that the suture can be left in for 10-12 days without leav- ing suture marks. Although it may be used by",
"13",
"14 FUNDAMENTAL TECHNIQUES OFPLASTIC SUfl.GERY",
"itself, it will be found that really accurate skin edge apposition is only possible if additional interrupted skin sutures are used. Its role then is to reduce tension on the interrupted sutures, and the smooth surface of monofilament materials used in this capacity makes for easier removal.",
"Continuous sutures The most useful continuous sutures are the 'blan- ket' stitch and the continuous 'over-and-over' (Fig. 1.13). The blanket stitch has the advantage of not 'bunching up' the wound and a double turn at each stitch converts it into a locked suture. The 'over-and-over' suture unfortunately does tend to bunch the wound. Such sutures cannot be placed as accurately as the interrupted suture, but where an impeccable scar is not essential they certainly save time. It is sometimes stated that the continuous suture tends to strangulate the wound edge, but this is the result of unduly tight insertion rather than any inherent defect of the method.",
"Suture materials Suture materials are now routinely swaged to an atraumatic needle, and the characteristics which separate one from another concern whether the material is non-absorbable and needs to be removed, or absorbable and can be left in situ, the extent to which it causes tissue reaction, and how it handles in clinical practice.",
"In its handling characteristics, silk remains the bench mark against which other non-absorbable suture materials are measured, but for many sur- geons synthetic materials such as nylon and pro- lene have largely replaced it, because the tissue reaction to their presence is less marked. Their handling characteristics have also improved, though they still do not match those of silk. Using silk, the appropriate degree of eversion of the wound, tension in tying the suture, and the placing of the knot to ensure that the wound edges are accurately apposed, are all easier to achieve than with the synthetics. Local reaction to the silk may be greater, but it lasts only until the suture is removed, when it imme- diately subsides. The multifilament silk is easier to remove atraumatically than the more rigid monofilament synthetic. In short, the technical",
"the correct",
"aspects of suture insertion and removal are easier with silk than synthetics. The extent to which these virtues might legitimately be considered to the temporary adverse tissue reaction offset which it causes is debatable. There is no objective evidence to suggest that the results achieved with the synthetics are any better than those achieved with silk, but there is also no doubt that to use silk is currently viewed as old fashioned.",
"The absorbable materials produce a much more severe tissue reaction, and one which con- tinues until they are completely resorbed. The reaction to buried catgut is generally considered to be greater than with the newer synthetic mater- ials, such as Vicryl, Dexon and PDS. This gener- alisation needs to be analysed in a little more depth, since the amount of the reaction also depends on the volume of the buried material. Even the slower absorption of the newer materials is accompanied by the presence of a granuloma at the site of each buried suture, even on occasion an abscess, and these persist as long as the material remains. The minimal reaction when 6-0 catgut is used in closing the skin in the primary repair of a cleft lip in a baby clearly reflects the small amount of catgut in the tissues, and it appears to be more than offset by the absence of the trauma involved in suture removal. Clearly a good deal depends on the cir- cumstances in which the sutures are used.",
"There is an increasing trend towards the use of inverted absorbable sutures to hold the edges of the dermis together, used with the aim of taking up any tension in the wound, and used along with or without cutaneous non-absorbable or a continuous subcuticular suture. The rationale is that the incidence and severity of cross-hatching is reduced, and that the persistence of the buried sutures will allow formation of the scar to pro- ceed with minimal tension, reducing the degree to which the scar will stretch. Here again, the evid- ence for this is derived from clinical impression.",
"DISTRIBUTION OF WOUND TENSION",
"When a wound is tending to distort, and it is dif- ficult to distribute the tension evenly on both sides for suturing, it often helps to make the",
"Fig. 1.14 Tattooing matching points with Bonney's Blue before making the skin incision to facilitate matching of corresponding points when the wound is beingsutured.",
"wound taut with a skin hook in each end so that a few key sutures can be placed accurately before inserting the intervening sutures. When distor- tion is to be expected, and especially in a curved trouble will be saved by tattooing incision, matching points (Fig. 1.14) with Bonney's Blue (gentian violet, 10g; (Pig. Tinctorium, BPC) brilliant green, 10 g; alcohol 95%, 950ml; water to 2000 ml) on either side of the projected incision before any cut is made.",
"THE THREE-POINT SUTURE",
"Where a triangular flap has to be inset, it is often difficult to get the tip of the flap to lie in position, yet multiple sutures placed through the full thickness of the dermis are apt to strangulate the tissue at the tip and produce necrosis. In such a situation the three-point suture (Fig. 1.15) helps",
"WOUND MANAGEMENT IS",
">$v",
"> ..,...\u00bb.",
"Suture strangulation causing flap tip necrosis",
"Incorrect placing of suture causing 'bunching' of the nap tip",
"Method of insertion and applications of the three-point suture",
"Fig. 1.15 The three-point suture.",
"to avoid necrosis while holding the tip in place. As frequently illustrated the suture tends to bunch the tip of the flap, and a minor variation is recommended which is theoretically sound and effective in practice in holding the tip with- out bunching. The points to be noted in inserting the suture are to make sure that the suture leaves andenters thereception side of thewoundat the same level in the dermis as its placement in the tip of the V flap and to make the suture emerge well back on the reception side of thewound. The principle of",
"the three-point suture can be extended for use where two flaps are being approximated to the third side of a wound.",
"LENGTH OF SCAR AND THE 'DOG-EAR'",
"When an oval or circular lesion is excised and the defect is closed directly the resulting scar is always considerably longer than the original lesion, a fact which it is always wise to explain to the patient.",
"16 FUNDAMENTAL TECHNIQUES OF PLASTIC SURGERY",
"Fig. J.J6 Removal of a 'dog-ear'. Following excision of the lesion (A), the margins of the defect are closed directly (8) until the dog-ear becomes apparent. The dog-ear is defined with a skin hook, and the skin is incised (C) around the base. The excess skin is defined and removed (0), and suturing of the wound is completed (E).",
"When the curved lines, ellipse up to circle, resulting from the excision are brought together in a straight line the effect is to lengthen the scar, In addition, closure of the ellipse almost invari- ably leaves a 'dog-ear' at each end of the suture line, and the correction of this lengthens the scar still further.",
"To remove a dog-ear (Fig. 1.16) the wound should be sutured until the elevation becomes pronounced, A hook placed in the end of the wound and raised defines the extent of the dog- ear, The elevation is then excised by incising around the base on one or other side, finishing in the line of the wound, The resulting flap is brought across the wound so that the excess skin can be defined and removed. The resulting line has a slight curve and its direction, which depends on the side of the dog-ear cut initially, can be chosen to fit the best line cosmetically.",
"Failure to remove the dog-ear leaves a rather unsightly swelling (Fig. 1.17), and although it flattens somewhat with the passage of time, it does tend to remain prominent enough to mar an otherwise satisfactory result.",
"HAEMATOMA",
"The most important single factor causing com- plications and bad results where surgery, whether it be incision or flap transfer, has other- wise been soundly planned and adequately car- ried out is haematoma. It provides a culture medium for organisms which in its absence",
"Fig. J.17 The result of failure to excise a 'dog-ear'.",
"would merely be commensals, and is readily converted into a collection of pus. Even in the absence of infection its presence adds to the gen- eral tension of the wound. It acts as a foreign body which, unless evacuated, becomes organ- ised, producing fibrosis and adding to scar tissue formation.",
"It is generally true that in a wound with an adequate blood supply and no obvious source of contamination, the occurrence of infection can nearly always be traced to haematoma. Indeed it is remarkable just how much contamination a wound can tolerate without clinical sepsis where there is no haematoma.",
"The aspects of haematoma specific to its occur- rence in flap transfer are discussed in Chapter 4. Present discussion is concerned with the more general considerations of its prevention and management.",
"Even with the greatest care it is not always possible to avoid haematoma, and the problem of treatment then arises. One's natural instinct is to evacuate the clot as soon as it is diagnosed, but while early evacuation is sometimes effective the bleeding which gave rise to the original haematoma is apt to begin again and cause recurrence. In addition the suture line has to be opened enough to allow extrusion of the haematoma and the handling, pressure, etc., needed to squeeze out the fairly solid clot has an unfortunate habit of causing further wound dehiscence.",
"An alternative method of managing the situa- tion is to await natural liquefaction of the clot, and aspirate it through a polythene intravenous cannula inserted obliquely at a distance from the suture line. At this stage there is no tendency to fresh bleeding and recurrence of the condition. The problem is that liquefaction can take up to 10 days, and in the interval it may become infected. Once infection develops, evacuation by opening the suture line, or even incision and drainage, may be needed although spontaneous discharge may occur. With a low-grade infection, aspira- tion may suffice if the clot cum pus has become sufficiently fluid.",
"Haematoma is very much a condition where prevention is better than cure, and the main measures used to prevent its occurrence are",
"WOUND MANAGEMENT 17",
"meticulous haemostasis and the avoidance of dead space. Where a potential dead space is unavoidable, the use of suction drainage is the most effective prophylactic. Apart from its effect- iveness, it has the virtue, in contrast to the use of pressure dressings which hide the situation until the haematoma is well established, of allowing the local state to be continuously monitored. It should be noted, in addition, that the use of antibiotics as prophylaxis against infection is of no value in the presence of a haematoma, management of which is surgical rather than medical.",
"POSTOPERATIVE CARE",
"The aim of good postoperative treatment is to prevent haematoma, provide rest for healing, and pre- vent suture marks. In practice this is achieved by the dressing, care in suture removal, and later support of the wound.",
"The dressing In the past, the use of pressure dressings was standard, with or without a drain. The pressure dressing, apart from preventing haematom a, cre- ated the immobility and splinting which were considered to provide the best conditions for rapid, uneventful healing. With the increased use of suction drainage there has been a marked reduction in the use of dressings generally, with exposure of the wound site increasingly stan- dard practice in combination with suction drainage if necessary.",
"When a dressing is used, the wide mesh of a single layer of tulle gras - tullefabric impregnated with petroleum jelly - allows the passage of any discharge, and this combined with the petroleum jelly base make it a particularly good dressing, permitting its removal with the minimum of trauma from sticking. Over the tulle gras, gauze and wool followed by a crepe bandage will give adequate, cushioned pressure and immobility. Elastoplast may replace the crepe bandage in suitable circumstances.",
"An alternative dressing which can be applied directly to the suture line is an adhesive 'paper' tape such as micropore or steristrips. It does not",
"18 FUNDAMENTAL TECHNIQUES OF PLASTIC SURGERY",
"macerate the skin, supports the wound well and yet, peeled off slowly, sticks neither to suture nor hair. Applied directly over the wound, its adhe- siveness encourages the wound edges to lie flush, a useful attribute when flap tips are tend- ing to lie a little proud of the wound as a whole. If no undermining has been used, such tape can provide the sole dressing. Apart from its role in the sutured wound, it can also on occasion be used to coapt wound edges and obviate the need for sutures at all, a considerable virtue when the young child with a laceration is being treated. When applying Elastoplast or adhesive paper strips, the surgeon should avoid placing the dressing with the skin under undue tension, either by stretching the Elastoplast or by putting the paper strip on one side of the wound and then pulling the skin closer to the other side of the wound. This creates a reaction in the under- lying skin which is similar in appearance to dermatitis. Patients who have experienced this problem frequently, but erroneously, describe themselves as having an allergy to the dressing materials.",
"When the wound is exposed it is desirable to keep the suture line free of blood until the fibrin clot covering the line of the wound is firm and dry. A mild degree of reaction at the site of the sutures is not uncommon, settling when they are removed and seeming not to affect the final result adversely. The severity of the reaction seems to parallel the degree of sebaceous activity in the particular area of the face and in the indi- vidual patient. The use of chloramphenicol oint- ment, conveniently applied from the small tube designed for ophthalmic use, has been found to eliminate this reaction to a considerable extent, and it has the incidental virtue of softening any minor discharge around the individual sutures and facilitating their removal. Rarely, chloram- phenicol sensitises to sunlight, under which cir- cumstances other ointments such as mupirocin or Polyfax (polymyxin and bacitracin) can be used as alternatives.",
"Suture removal Set days are apt to be laid down for the removal of sutures in various sites and under varying circumstances, but this approach is quite wrong.",
"The principle is to remove at the earliest time judged safe, and this depends on so many factors - degree of tension, site, line of wound, etc. - that it is quite impossible to lay down hard and fast rules. In any case clinical experience soon tells the surgeon when a suture may be removed safely.",
"In removing the suture (Fig. 1.18) it must be remembered that the tensile strength of the wound is minimal, and dehiscence is liable to occur on the slightest provocation. Where most care is needed, the sutures are usually",
"Correct methods",
"Incorrect method",
"Fig. 1.18 The technique of suture removal, showing the use of iris scissors and a No. II scalpel blade.",
"Correctly removed, the suture is pulled towards the wound. Incorrect removal. pulling the suture away from the wound, causes added tension across the wound. and is liable to result in dehiscence.",
"smallest, and prerequisites for safe removal are a good light, fine, sharp scissors which cut to the point, and fine dissecting forceps which grip properly. The technique of removal is not radically different from suture removal in other surgical contexts, except for the degree of gentle- ness which is necessary and the fact that the suture, once cut, must be pulled out towards the wound, not away from it. In removal, as in inser- tion of the suture, the surgeon should have his elbows well supported, and work from wrist and fingers to give smooth movements without tremor. The patient should also be carefully sup- ported so that the suture line stays absolutely still.",
"Scissors are not invariably sharp, nor do they always cut to the point, and a good alternative",
"WOUND MANAGEMENT 19",
"method is to use the triangular tip of a No. 11 scalpel blade (Fig. 1.18)to cut the suture. In a dif- ficult situation its sharp point will often cut the suture with less disturbance of the wound than scissors.",
"Subsequent support ofthe wound Early suture removal leaves the wound devoid of strength, and a sudden ill-judged tension strain may cause it to dehisce. For this reason the wound is best supported or at very least pro- tected for up to a week after suture removal, and micropore skin tape works well in this role. It is seldom practicable to support the wound much beyond this, and indeed attempts to prevent later stretching of the wound by prolonged sup- port are of little avail.",
"The Z-plasty",
"The Z-plasty is a procedure which involves the transposition of two interdigitating triangu- lar flaps. The name derives from the 'Z' shape seen when the three limbs of the flaps are drawn out on the skin. Transposition of the flaps has several effects (Fig. 2.D, of which two have special relevance:",
"1. There is a gain in length along the direction of the common limb of the Z.",
"2. The direction of the common limb of the Z is changed.",
"Exploitation of these effects has made the Z- plasty an extremely useful and widely used procedure. Its value has been most strikingly",
"Fig. 2.1 The Z-plasty.",
"2",
"established in three sets of circumstances: in the treatment of contracted scars, when use is made of the gain in length, in the management of facial scars, when use is made of the change in direction of the common limb, and in the prevention of scar contracture in certain types of elective and emergency surgery, particularly in the hand. This latter usage is discussed in Chapter 11.",
"Lengthening and change of direction of the common limb occur together as a result of transposition, but it is usually only one of the two which concerns the surgeon at any particu- lar time. The fact that the other is accomplished at the same time is usually a bonus, though it can be a nuisance.",
"22 FUNDAMENTAL TECHNIQUES OF PLASTIC SURGERY",
"THEORETICAL BASIS",
"The Z-plasty was originally used in releasing contracted scars, and its theoretical basis can be more easily understood if it is considered with that as the background.",
"The basic manoeuvre When the Z-plasty is used to release a contrac- ture, the common limb, i.e. the central limb of the Z, is positioned along the line of the contracture. The size of each of the angles of the Z is 60\u00b0, a compromise figure which has been reached as a result of experience. The reasons for selecting this angle size and the effects of altering it are discussed later, but 60\u00b0 will be the size used in the present discussion.",
"shape of the parallelogram, and the triangular contractural flaps become transposed, diagonal lengthens and the transverse diagonal shortens (Fig. 2.3).",
"the",
"It is important to appreciate that when a Z-plasty is used properly to correct a linear contracture the surgeon does not actively transpose the Z flaps. Flap transposition follows naturally from the change in shape of the parallelogram, as do the lengtl1ening and theshortening.",
"The changes in length are such that the length of the contractural diagonal after transposition equals that of the transverse diagonal before transposition. The contractural diagonal has lengthened at the expense of the transverse diagonal, which has shortened as much as the contractural diagonal has lengthened.",
"Constructed in this way the two triangles together have the shape of a parallelogram with its shorter diagonal in the line of the contracture, its longer diagonal perpendicular to it. The two diagonals can conveniently be referred to as the contractural diagonal and the transverse diagonal (Fig. 2.2).",
"Translated into practical terms this means that skin has been brought in from the sides with a tightening effect, as shown by the shortening of the transverse diagonal, to allow the lengthening of the contractural diagonal. The difference in length of the two diagonals indicates the actual amount of lengthening and shortening.",
"In order to understand the sequence of events when a Z-plasty is used in releasing a contrac- ture it is essential to bear in mind that the com- mon limb of the Z, being along the line of the contracture, is under tension. Its ends spring apart when the interdigitating flaps are raised and the fibrous tissue band responsible for the contracture is divided. The springing apart of the divided contracture results in a change in the",
"The surgeon's interest is in the lengthening rather than the shortening, but it is crucial to suc- cessful Z-plasty practice to realise that lengthen- ing cannot take place without the transverse shortening. Translated into practical terms, this means that unless there is transverse skin slack available, equal in quantity to the length differ- ence between the axes of the Z, the method will not work.",
"Fig. 2.2 The diagonals of the Z-plasty.showing how, with transposition of the Z-plasty flaps.the contractural diagonal is lengthened and the transverse diagonal is shortened.",
"THE Z-PLASTY 1J",
"Fig. 2.3 The several stages of the Z-plasty, demonstrating how division of the contracture, shown diagrammatically as a single band. has the effect of changing the shape of the Z, lengthening the contractural diagonal and shortening the transverse diagonal.",
"Variables in construction Since the skin flaps must fit together in their transposed position, the limbs of the Z are con- structed equal in length. The angles of the Z are also usually made equal in size. The factors which do vary are angle size and limb length, and the ways in which variation in these factors affects the result provide an explanation of why specific constructions are used in particular sets of circumstances.",
"These increases are theoretical and they cannot be applied with strict accuracy to the clinical is taken of situation,",
"though when account",
"Angle size",
"Angle size. Once the lengths of the limbs of the Z have been fixed the amount of lengthening to be expected is determined by the size of the angle, its amount increasing with increase in the size of the angle. With an angle of 30\u00b0 there is theoretically a 25% increase in the original length, with 45\u00b0 a 50% increase, and with an angle of 60\u00b0 the increase rises to 75% (Fig. 2.4).",
"in length",
"--------- -------- - Fig. 2.4 The changes in the percentage increase of length which results from the use of different angle sizes.",
"24 FUNDAMENTAL TECHNIQUES OF PLASTIC SURGERY",
"variations in skin extensibility, pre-existing scar- ring, etc., it is surprising how well they do apply. The theoretical lengthening usually exceeds slightly what can be achieved in practice.",
"In releasing a contracture the object of the Z- piasty is to maximise the amount of lengthening. Narrowing the angle much below 60\u00b0 would defeat since the smaller angle would reduce the gain in length, and adversely influence the blood supply of the flaps.",
"this object,",
"Increase in angle size much beyond 60\u00b0 would increase the amount of lengthening, but it would also entail an equal increase in the amount of transverse shortening. Tissue for transverse shortening is seldom available in unlimited quantity, and it is found in practice that when the angle increases beyond 60\u00b0 the tension produced in the surrounding tissues tends to be so great that the flaps cannot read- ily be brought into their transposed position. For this reason 60\u00b0 is the compromise figure used for angle size.",
"Limb length. With the use of 60\u00b0 as the routine Z-plasty angle, it is length of limb which pro- vides the major variable in practice. The amount of tissue available on either side determines the practicable limb length - a large amount permits a large Z, a small amount correspondingly limits the size of the Z.",
"Single and multiple Z-plasty The search for ways of reducing the amount of transverse shortening without significantly affecting the amount of lengthening has led to the development of the multiple Z-plasty, and its advantages are such that it has replaced the single Z-plasty in many clinical situations.",
"In the single Z-plasty one large Z extends along virtually the entire length of the contrac- ture; in the multiple Z-plasty the contracture is viewed as having a number of segments, on each of which a small Z-plasty is constructed.",
"The contrast between the two types of Z-plasty can best be appreciated by using a concrete example. If we construct a single Z-plasty which is going to achieve 2 em of lengthening, and the same time construct a series of four at small Z-plasties, each equal in size to a quarter of the single Z-plasty, they can be compared from",
"Single Z-plasty",
"Multiple Z-plasty",
"Lateral tension concentrated",
"Scale 1cm",
"Lateral tension",
"diffused",
"Lengthening, 2cm Shortening, 2cm",
"Lengthening, 2cm Shortening, a.5cm",
"Fig. 2.S Comparison of the lengthening and shortening pro- duced by a single and a multiple Z-plasty. Note also how lateral tension is concentrated by the single Z-plasty and diffused by the multiple Z-plasty.",
"the point of view of lengthening and shortening (Fig. 2.5).",
"The single Z-plasty achieves 2 em of lengthen- ing and at the same time there is 2 em of shorten- ing in the transverse axis.",
"In the multiple Z-plasty, each of the four Z- pla sties achieves 0.5 em of lengthening with a corresponding 0.5 em of shortening at each transverse axis. The lengthening which occurs is in series and consequently is additive, giving an overall lengthening of 2 em, while the shortening is in parallel, and remains 0.5 em at each Z. The amount of lengthening achieved by each is thus the same, but the shortening has been greatly reduced by the use of the multiple Z-plasty. Many clinical situations exist where a Z-plasty could be used to advantage, but the tissues cannot stand 2 em of shortening, though they could tole- rate 0.5 em with ease, and for these the multiple Z-plasty is a possible solution.",
"The change from single to multiple Z-plasty also alters the form of the lateral tension. From being concentrated in the line of the transverse",
"limb of the single Z, it is spread over the several transverse limbs of the multiple Z-plasty in addition to being reduced. These differences have obvious advantages from a vascular point of view.",
"In the multiple Z-plasty, as in the single Z- plasty, the theoretical lengthening is probably unattainable. Quite apart from the effect of scarring, etc., there tends to be some loss of leng thening in passage from one Z to the next. Nevertheless the comparison between the two, and the advantages of the multiple over the single, are still valid.",
"Blood supply of the flaps The most frequent complication of a Z-plasty is necrosis of the tip of a flap and it is a particu- lar hazard when there is scarring of the skin or, more commonly, when the skin flap raised has to be excessively thin, e.g. in Dupuytren's contrac- ture involving the finger, a problem discussed in greater detail on p. 194. Precautions to avoid necrosis can be taken at all stages of the proced- ure - by providing the flaps with the maximum of vascular capacity, and by avoiding tension.",
"Provision of maximum vascular capacity. This is achieved by designing the flaps broad at the tip, by cutting the flaps as thick as possible, and by avoiding scarring across the base. The tip of the flap can be broadened by modifying its shape slightly without affecting its angle size (Fig. 2.6). The thickest flap practicable should always be cut, making use of the levels of undermining described on p. 10.",
"Avoidance of undue tension. Tension in the transposed flaps can be very difficult to avoid, particularly when the contracture is a dubious candidate for a Z-plasty. Indeed its presence",
"Standard shape of the flaps",
"Shapemodified to broaden the tip of each flap",
"Fig. 2.6 The modified shape of the Z.plasty flaps which gives maximum vascularcapacity.",
"THE Z\u00b7PLASTY 25",
"is usually an indication of this fact. The single Z-plasty, with its large flaps, is more prone to this problem, since it concentrates transverse tension; the smaller flaps of the multiple Z-plasty are less liable, since their effect is to reduce and diffuse the transverse tension, thereby minimis- ing circulatory embarrassment.",
"CLINICAL USAGE",
"The Z-plasty is used in different clinical situa- tions, in some of which the theoretical basis of the procedure is not immediately obvious, but in each one analysis of the changes which take place with transposition of the flaps is capable of explaining the effect of the change in terms of lengthening and shortening, or of a change in the direction of the common limb.",
"Use in contradures From the theoretical discussion it follows that the Z-plasty is most effective where the contrac- ture is narrow and the surrounding tissues are reasonably lax. Scarred and contracted tis- sue on either side can yield no 'slack' to allow lengthening, which explains why the postburn contracture is so seldom totally correctable by a Z-plasty, single or multiple. In contracting, the burn scar contracts in all directions simultan- eously, and although a contracture may be pres- ent clinically, skin has actually been lost in every axis. The contractural axis is only the most obviously tight. The transverse axis is just as short and it is unable to shorten any further in the way that would be needed for a successful Z-plasty.",
"Ideally, the central limb of the Z should extend the full length of the contracture but this requires a correspondingly large quantity of tissue to be brought in from the sides, tissue which is not always available. The problem arises in the limbs particularly, for such tissue as is available tends to be spread out along the length of the limb rather than being concentrated at one point. As has been discussed above, the solution in such circumstances is likely to lie in constructing a multiple Z-plasty rather than a single Z-plasty, bringing in from the sides smaller quantities of",
"26 FUNDAMENTAL TECHNIQUES OF PLASTIC SURGERY",
"tissue along the entire length of the contracture (Fig. 2.5).",
"A good measure of the planning and execution of a Z-plasty is the behaviour of the flaps when the contracture is released. If the manoeuvre has been well planned and carried out the flaps should literally fall transposed position. Indeed it should be difficult to return them to their old relationship.",
"into their",
"Planning the Z-plasty (Figs 2.8, 2.9) It may be difficult in planning the procedure to decide where the flaps should be. A good method is to draw an equilateral triangle on each side of the contracture (see Fig. 11.6), and to select the more suitable of the two sets of limbs from the resulting parallelogram. If neither has any demonstrable advantage either may be used.",
"Factors which might favour one set are:",
"The Z-plasty, single or multiple, is most effect- ive when the contracture is of the bowstring type. When the contracture is more diffuse it is less satisfactory, and a stage is eventually reached where the decision has to be made whether a Z- plasty is appropriate at all, or whether fresh skin should be imported from elsewhere in the form of a free skin graft or flap. The answer is usually to be found in the surrounding skin; transverse slack must be present if the contracture is to be released and if it is not obviously available there (Fig. 2.7) the Z-plasty will fail.",
"1. The flap with the better blood supply is preferable. In particular a potential flap with scarring across the base should be avoided. 2. One flap may result in a scar which will fall into a better line cosmetically. The factors which would influence the choice in such circumstances have already been discussed in Chapter 1.",
"3. The lie of the flaps and the surrounding skin may permit one set of flaps to transpose more readily into their new position.",
"Fig. 2.7 A narrow axillary contracture (A), suitable for correction by a Z-plasty. and a diffuse axillary contracture (8), unsuitable for a Z plasty,and requiring for its correction the insertion of a split skin graft.",
"THEZ.PLASTY 27",
"Fig.2.8 The use of a single Z-plasty to correct the neck webbing component ofTurner's syndrome.",
"Fig. 2.9 The use of a multiple Z-plasty in correcting a localised postburn contracture of the neck.",
"Skin which shows scarring has lost some of its normal elasticity and this may affect the planning of the flaps. A flap of scarred skin should be designed a little longer initially than its fellow of normal skin, otherwise the scarred flap will be found to be too short when it is sutured to the unscarred flap.",
"It is usual, although not essential, to have the two angles of equal size. On occasion a line",
"of scarring can limit the angle of one flap and dissimilar angles may then have to be used. Lengthening and shortening then become the average of the amount to be expected from each angle alone. Indeed, if the full quadrilateral of any Z-plasty is drawn, complete with contrac- tural and transverse diagonals, the transverse diago- nal will provide an indication of the actual length to be expected when the flaps are transposed.",
"28 FUNDAMENTAL TECHNIQUES OF PLASTIC SURGERY",
"The multiple Z-plasty In designing a multiple Z-plasty the line of the contracture can be viewed as a series of contrac- ted segments, on each of which a small Z-plasty is constructed, creating a line of individual Z- plasties, but in practice it is more usual to con- struct them in the form of a continuous multiple Z-plasty (Fig. 2.10). In this, the Zs, instead of being individual, are designed as a continuous series with a single line along the length of the contracture and multiple Z side limbs (Fig. 11.7). In theory such a multiple Z-plasty can be constructed with the side limbs parallel or skew. The presence of scarring in a particular line may influence the construction and make skew flaps preferable, but the use of parallel limbs allows the flaps to transpose uniformly. It also avoids the construction of a broad-tipped flap with a narrow base, undesirable from a vascular point of view, and unavoidable with the skew construction.",
"Whether a multiple Z-plasty has to be used largely depends on the depth of the bowstring. It is unwise to take the side limbs much beyond the base of the bowstring, and if the making of a large Z would encroach on the surrounding flat skin to any extent, especially if the skin tends to be taut, a multiple Z-plasty (Fig. 2.9) is safer and on the whole just as effective.",
"Parallel construction",
"Skew construction",
"The evolution of the parallel and skew types of the Fig. 2.10 continuous multiple Zvplasty from a series of interrupted small Z plasties.",
"Use in facial scars Scars in the face tend to be more cosmetically acceptable the more nearly they lie in a line of election, and a problem of acceptability can arise when an otherwise satisfactory scar is more than 30\u00b0 off the line of election. When a Z-plasty is used to improve the appearance of a scar, its effect as a rule is to break the line of the scar and change its direction. This change in direction involves the common limb of the Z-plasty, and the object is to place it postoperatively as nearly as possible in a line of election.",
"The success of the method used to place the common limb of the completed Z-plasty accu- rately in terms of size, site, and direction depends on two facts. First, if the Z-plasty inci- sions are made to end on the selected transverse transposition of the flaps will leave the line, common limb lying along the line as planned (Fig. 2.11). Second, the limbs of the Z-plasty are equal in length.",
"The planning of the Z-plasty used for this pur- pose must be regarded as a formal procedure, marked out carefully on the skin with Bonney's Blue before any actual incision is made. The steps themselves are more easily illustrated than described (Figs 2.11,2.12).",
"With the scar outlined (1), the line, preferably in a line of election, is selected for the postopera- tive common limb, and drawn out on the skin (2). The length of the intended common limb, which determines the size of the Z-plasty, is measured out on the line of the scar, propor- tioned approximately evenly on each side of the line already selected and drawn out as the post- operative common limb (3). From each extremity of this measured length, a line of equal length is marked out to meet the line drawn out to repre- sent the postoperative common limb (4). These steps outline the Z-plasty flaps (5). The fact that the two oblique lines have been made to end on the selected transverse line means that transposi- tion of the flaps will bring the common limb into the desired line as planned, regardless of its direction (6).",
"Altering the obliquity of the line selected for the postoperative common limb has the effect of altering the size of the Z-plasty angle. Increase of obliquity reduces the angle and decrease of",
"THE Z-PLASTY 29",
"Fig.2.11 instance the line of the nasolabial fold.",
"The steps in planning a Z-plasty so that the transverse limb of the completed Z-plasty lies in a predetermined line. in this",
"Fig.2.12 The use of the method shown in Figure 2.11 in revising a scar crossing the nasolabial fold. A The scar outlined. and the line of election - the nasolabial fold. B The lines of the Z. all equal in length. and with each oblique line ending on the line of election. C The scar excised. and the Z flaps transposed. o The procedure completed with the transverse limb of the Z lying along the line of election as planned.",
"30 FUNDAMENTAL TECHNIQUES OF PLASTIC SURGERY",
"obliquity increases the angle, to a maximum of 60\u00b0, at which point the common limb becomes perpendicular to the line of the scar.",
"As the common limb departs from the perpen- dicular the flap becomes narrower and the blood supply to its tip increasingly tenuous. Facial skin with its excellent blood supply is more tolerant of narrow flaps than skin elsewhere on the body surface, but even in the face there is a limit to permissible narrowness. A tip angle of 35\u00b0 is as narrow as can be used with safety. Even then care in suturing near the tip of each flap is neces- sary (Fig. 2.13). Fortunately the angle size can be gauged at the planning stage before any incision is made.",
"In the long facial scar it may be desirable to break the line with more than a single Z-plasty. Scars are not invariably straight and lines of elec- tion usually run in different directions in differ- ent parts of the scar. Each Z-plasty has generally to be planned strictly on its own, with its indi- vidual and quite distinct obliquity. The effect is to convert the single linear scar into a series of smaller scars joined by transverse limbs in lines of election, ideally in actual wrinkle lines. Even at worst, several small scars tend to be less con- spicuous than a single long scar. It is also found that a large Z-plasty does not give as good a In planning result as the smaller Z-plasty. therefore, the estimated length of the transverse limb should be kept fairly small (Fig. 2.13).",
"When a multiple Z-plasty is used to break up a facial scar simultaneous lengthening takes place, and this shows as an overlapping of the flaps as they pass from one Z to the next. Trimming of the overlap is usually required in order to reduce the overall lengthening.",
"Patient selection Whether or not to incorporate a Z-plasty in revis- ing a particular facial scar can be an extremely difficult decision. Revision, with or without a Z- plasty, is generally postponed until the scar has largely settled, and the improvement in its appearance is near maximal. Revision, incorpor- ating one or more Z-plasties, involves increasing the length of the wound significantly, and the early result all too often appears disappointing both to surgeon and patient. Only once the reaction has slowly settled, and the scars soften once again, does the benefit become apparent.",
"Consideration of how the original scar has behaved may be of help in deciding. Any sug- gestion of hypertrophy of the original scar should be seen as a warning against any revi- sion, let alone one which incorporates a Z-plasty. The patient who already has a marked wrinkle pattern tends to be a better than average candi- date, particularly if the scar has become pale and matches the surrounding skin well. The smooth, uncreased adult skin should be viewed with caution.",
"Fig.2.13 Scar excision with three Z-plasty inserts. Each insert has been individually planned to place its transverse limb in the direction of the local line of election.",
"The completely settled scar which has re- mained conspicuous because it continues to be redder than the surrounding skin, as some scars do even though they have become quite soft, is a bad candidate. The end result is likely merely to be a longer red scar, for each transverse limb stays as red as the rest of the scar and its line fails to merge into the background despite being in a",
"Fig. 2.14 The use of Z-plasties in revisinga bridle scar crossing the submandibular concavity.",
"THE Z-PLASTY n",
"line of election. The problem is seen most often in the patient with the so-called Celtic skin.",
"A conservative approach to the use of the Z- plasty in facial scars has much to be said for it, confining its use to the patient in whom revision will allow an obvious line of election, such as the nasolabial fold, to be used in breaking the line.",
"The use of the Z-plasty in the revision of facial scars in children is generally contraindicated. Scars as a whole are not considered to behave well in children in any case, but an added reason is the smoothness of their skin, and the absence of wrinkles in which a scar can be concealed.",
"Use in bridle scars When a scar crosses a hollow, contraction along its length tends to give rise to a ridged or bridle scar bridging the hollow. Such a scar has similarities to a straightforward contracture and the solution is equally the use of a Z-plasty (Fig. 2.14).",
"Correction of the bridle element requires an increase in the length of the scar to allow it to sit into the hollow which it is bridging, but it is also",
"Fig. 2.15 The use of the Z\u00b7plasty in bridle scars, showing (I) the rationale of the use of a single Z-plasty in the scar bridging a deep hollow, and (2) a multiple Z-plasty in the scar bridging a shallow hollow.",
"32 FUNDAMENTAL TECHNIQUES OF PLASTIC SURGERY",
"necessary to shorten the distance from the skin in the hollow on one side of the scar as it rises to the line of the scar and drops to the hollow on its other side. These two axes are at right angles to each other, and if they are viewed as the axes of a Z-plasty constructed around them, transposition of the flaps will result in lengthening of the axis",
"Fig. 2.16 The recurrence of trap-door scarring of the cheek following simple excision and suture of the scar.",
"along the line of the scar allowing it to sit into the hollow, while shortening of the other axis will pull the line of the scar down into the hollow (Fig. 2.15).",
"When the scar is short and the hollow is deep the lengthening of the scar which follows trans- position of the flaps of a single Z-plasty may be",
"Fig. 2.17 The correction of a trap-door scar of the chin following excision of the scar with the insertion of Z-plasties.",
"Fig. 2.18 two sides of a wound which were previously unequal.",
"The use of Z\u00b7plasties in equalising the lengths of the",
"matched by the reduction in length of the trans- verse axis crossing the line of the scar, and a single Z-plasty (Fig. 2.15(1)) extending along the greater part of the length of the scar is then likely to be effective.",
"Where the bridle scar is longer and relatively shallow the amount of shortening of the axis crossing the line of the scar may be quite small lengthening compared with the amount of required to allow the scar to lie in the hollow, but the shortening may need to be repeated along the line of the scar. In such a situation a multiple Z-plasty would be the version to use (Fig. 2.15(2\u00bb. Depending on the site of the bridle scar, the detailed planning of such a multiple Z-plasty may involve the added complication of trying to fit the transverse limbs into a line of election. As long as it is remembered that each transverse limb can be positioned independently using the",
"THE Z\u00b7PLASTY 33",
"method shown in Fig. 2.12, this does not pose insuperable difficulties.",
"Use in curving scars This problem is seen in its worst form when a trap- door of skin which has been uplifted, usually as a result of is sutured back in place. Contraction of the resulting scar tissue causes eleva- tion of the tissue within its concavity Seen later the result may be assumed, not unreasonably, to be due to bad suturing, but excision of the scar, trimming of the flap quite flat, and resuture with the greatest care only results in recurrence of the original state of affairs within a matter of weeks (Fig. 2.16).",
"trauma,",
"The fundamental difficulty in surgical correction of a trap-door scar is the extent of the invisible sub-",
"Fig. 2.19 The incorporation of Z-plasties during revision of a scar at the margin of a flap. used in conjunction with thinning of the flap, to give a smooth junction between the flap and its surroundings.",
"34 FUNDAMENTAL TECHNIQUES OF PLASTIC SUl\\.GERY",
"cutaneous scarring which produces contracture beneath the entire area of trap-deering. Under cer- tain circumstances, the Z-plasty can be used to lengthen the marginal scar and break up the sub- cutaneous scarring to good effect. Here, as in cor- recting the bridle scar, an effort should be made to place any Z-plasty in a line of election, although with the curving scar the planning of the Z-plasty to give the best result from every point of view can be an extremely difficult exercise and one in which facility comes only with experience (Fig. 2.17). Even with experience, however, the end result invariably falls short of the desired ideal.",
"On occasionthe problem of the curving scar takes a slightly different form, as when the two sides of a",
"wound to be sutured are unequal in length, as in the excision of a 'comma-shaped' scar. The taking of unequal bites in suturing can partially equate the lengths but this has limited effectiveness. The Z- plasty can then sometimes help further to reduce the discrepancy in lengths (Fig. 2.18).",
"Use in overriding scars Where there is a tendency to overriding of the tissue on one side of a scar the junction between the two sides can usually be smoothed by incorporating one or more Z-plasties when the scar is being excised (Fig. 2.19), and here again the use of lines of election should be remembered.",
"Free skin grafts",
"Free skin grafts (Fig. 3.1) are of two kinds:",
"1. Full thickness skin graft consisting of epider- mis and the full thickness of dermis.",
"2. Split skin graft consisting of epidermis and a variable proportion of dermis. Split skin grafts are described as thin, intermediate or thick according to the thickness of dermis included. These various categories of graft are not from each other.",
"really completely distinct",
"They merely represent convenient reference points on a continuous scale of decreasing thickness from the full thickness skin graft to the graft consisting of little more than epidermis. The real difference in practice is between the thickness skin graft and the split skin full graft. The full is cut with a scalpel while the split skin graft, of what- is usually cut with a special ever thickness, instrument.",
"thickness skin graft",
"Full thickness skin",
"Fig. 3.1 The thickness of the various types of free skin grafts. showing the constituents of each.",
"Flaps",
"A flap, in contradistinction to a skin graft, contains within its substance a network of blood vessels, arterial, capillary and venous, and it is the effect- iveness of the circulation through this network in perfusing the tissues of the flap at each stage of its transfer from donor to recipient site which determines its survival. The anatomical basis of the vascular network varies considerably in dif- ferent sites of the body, and flaps with a striking diversity of tissue content and vascular patterns have been developed to exploit these variations. flap types are largely named according to the tissue transferred. A flap which consists of skin and superficial fascia is referred to as a skin flap. When the investing layer of deep fascia is included, the flap becomes fascio- cutaneous. A flap may also consist of a muscle, usually detached at one end, and moved to cover a surface which is unsuitable for grafting, for example bare cortical bone. When covered by such a muscle flap, the surface which results accepts a graft readily. The principle of the mus- cle flap has been extended to include the skin overlying the muscle, on occasion also bone to which the muscle is attached, the composite flap being myocutaneous or osteomyocutaneous depending on the constituents.",
"The major",
"Prior to the development of the technique of joining small blood vessels together, flaps had to retain a vascular attachment to the body through- out their transfer, but it is now possible to trans- fer a flap en bloc to a distant site in a single stage, as a free flap, anastomosing its vascular system to suitable vessels in the recipient area.",
"Much of the jargon used in flap description from the vocabulary developed to",
"derives",
"describe skin flap practice. It will be discussed in that context, but it can be freely transferred to describe other flap types.",
"A flap is transferred to reconstruct a primary defect, and is inset into this defect. The transfer usually leaves a secondary defect which in most instances is closed by direct suture, or covered with a free skin graft.",
"The flap may be raised as a local flap from the tissues in the immediate vicinity of the primary defect, its movement usually taking the form of transposition or rotation, the term applied to the flap. Alternatively, the transfer may involve the movement of tissue at a distance from the primary defect, and is then called a distant flap. The entire flap, or its greater part, may be inset into the defect at the initial transfer, and the proximal segment is then referred to as its base. Alternatively, only the distal segment of the flap may be inset into the defect, its central segment and base remaining unattached. The base is then often referred to as the pedicle of the flap and the central segment as its bridge segment. These two, pedicle and bridge segment, act as the car- rier of the flap and provide the channel of blood supply to its distal segment. It is generally con- sidered desirable to eliminate unnecessary raw surface in such a flap, and so reduce the likeli- hood of infection, and this explains the practice of either tubing the bridge segment of a flap, or lining it with a split skin graft depending on the local circumstances. It is seldom techni- cally possible to tube or line the local flaps commonly used in the face, but infection is rarely a problem because of the excellence of the local blood supply.",
"61 FUNDAMENTAL TECHNIQUES OF PlASTICSURGERY",
"Once the distal segment of the flap is estab- lished in its new site, which usually takes 3 weeks, the bridge segment is divided, and either returned to its original site or discarded depend- ing on the local situation. Insetting of the distal segment is then completed.",
"The pedicle of a skin flap usually consists, like the rest of the flap, of skin and subcutaneous tis- sue, but it is occasionally reduced to its subcutan- eous component. In such circumstances it is the distal segment, with a full complement of skin and subcutaneous tissue, which is transferred as an island flap.",
"A distant flap can be transferred to its destina- tion in several ways. It can be directly applied to the primary defect, it can be waltzed, pivoted on its pedicle, or it may be attached to a carrier, usu- ally the wrist, on which it is conveyed to its des- tination. The wrist is selected as a carrier because its reach makes it possible for the flap to leap- frog a considerable distance in a single step. Waltzing of a flap tends to be used only when the distance between the flap and the primary defect is not great, and the transfer can be completed in a single movement. Transfer using a wrist carrier is an extreme rarity today.",
"It is sometimes felt that the blood supply of a flap would not be adequate for its survival if it were raised and transferred straightaway. Its vascular efficiency can be enhanced by surgically outlining the flap prior to its actual transfer, the procedure and its effect both being referred to as a delay. The term has also come to be applied to any surgical procedure used to improve the blood supply of a flap during transfer.",
"Most local flaps have a centre around which they rotate or are transposed, and this is referred to as the pivot point. When the flap is being designed, it is from this point that measurements are made to ensure that its geometry will allow it to achieve its transfer safely. When a flap is leap- frogging over intact tissue an alternative tech- nique, planning in reverse, is used.",
"A difficulty which arises in describing in a sys- tematic manner the flaps which are used most frequently today is that some belong to more than one category. Among the group of muscle and myocutaneous flaps some are used solely as muscle, and some only as myocutaneous flaps,",
"while some are used in either form. To compli- cate the situation still further, some in each cate- gory are transferred as free flaps. A similarly confused situation exists in relation to certain of the skin and fasciocutaneous flaps.",
"With the development offree tissue transfer, prob- lems of nomenclature have arisen in distinguishing between grafts and flaps, most obviously in dis- cussing the transfer of uascularieed bone. ln such a transfer, the pre-existing vascular structure of the bone is maintained intact, its blood supply m'erely temporarily interrupted, rather than re-established through vascular link-up at a capillary level, as ill a graft. To refer to sucha transfer as a graft, admittedly a vascularised graft, may be regarded by the purist as a misnomer, but it has become standard usage, and as suchhas probably to be accepted.",
"VASCULAR ASPECTS OF FLAPS",
"Effective tissue perfusion determines the viabil- ity of all flaps, and dominates every aspect of their design and transfer. Skill in the design and use of flaps is very much a matter of balancing the demands of blood supply against those of flap geometry.",
"Flaps which lack a clear-cut directional orient- ation of blood flow, and have no focal point where arterial input and venous outflow are recognisably concentrated, tend to have ineffici- ent perfusion characteristics and poor safety records. A well-defined directional orientation of blood flow, and anatomically recognisable vessels providing input and outflow, go with safety in transfer.",
"ANATOMICAL BACKGROUND",
"In the body sites which are considered to have major potential for use as skin and fasciocutan- eous flaps, the skin is perfused from a vascular network running horizontally in relation to the investing layer of deep fascia. The network is fed from vessels which emerge at intervals from the deeper tissues, referred to as perforators, direct branches of the system of arteries and veins whose primary function is to perfuse the deeper",
"FLAPS",
"structures, muscles and bones. A contribution to the skin circulation is also made by small vessels which reach it from the muscles which lie dir- ectly under the skin. Such evidence as exists would suggest that under normal physiological conditions these vessels do not contribute significantly to perfu- sion of theskin,but in some sites they are certainly capable of sustaining skin viability in the absence of other sources, since they form the vascular basis of myocutaneous flaps.",
"The pattern of sites at which these perforating vessels emerge shows a striking consistency, and following their emergence they run horizontally, giving off branches as they go. The great major- ity of these branches are not terminal, but instead link-up with vessels of a similar calibre. The rich- ness of the resulting anastomoses and the calibre of the vessels involved vary in different sites, but is to create a largely uniform and the effect apparently random vascular network with little evidence of separate territories fed from individ- ual perforators. It is this plexus (Fig. 4.1) which provides the background to the circulation from which the skin is perfused.",
"The face and scalp have in common an extremely rich skin blood supply, but the differ- ences in their anatomical features have resulted in different vascular patterns above and below the level of the zygomatic arch (Fig. 4.2).",
"Fig. 4.1 The plexus of small arteries which provide the perfu- sion sources of the skin, in this instance of the anterolateral abdominal wall. Several perforating vessels providing arterial input are clearly visible, but the uniformity of the background plexus is very striking. (From M. Salmon, de fa Peau, Masson, Paris, 1936.)",
"Superficial temporal artery-anterior branch",
"Occipital artery\"",
"Posterior auricular artery",
"Supratrochlear artery",
"Fig.4.2 Vascular patterns above and below the zygomatic arch.",
"Below the zygomatic arch there is a rich subdermal vascular plexus fed from perforator branches of the deeper pattern of anatomically named vessels.Above the arch a network of blood vessels runs horizontally in the fascial layer between the skin and galea with no significant deep connections, fed from the vessels around the margins of the scalp.",
"FUNDAMENTAL TECHNIQUES OF PLASTIC SURGERY",
"Below the zygomatic arch there is a rich dermal and subdermal plexus of small vessels fed mainly from branches of the facial artery, but also from the transverse facial artery and the vessels emerging from the bony foramina, infra- orbital and mental. The branches of the facial artery emerge between the facial muscles which radiate from the angle of the mouth, the trans- verse facial artery emerges from the parotid gland, becoming subcutaneous a little above its duct, and the infraorbital and mental arteries emerge from the corresponding foramina. Multiple anastomoses unite the three systems, and from this background the subdermal and dermal circulation is fed.",
"Above the zygomatic arch a wealth of vessels of a sizeable calibre form an anastomotic pattern running horizontally between the skin and the galea. They are derived from vessels which reach the area from its periphery and they have no deep connections. This absence of deep connec- tions means that delay of a scalp flap need never include elevation. Axial pattern flaps (see p. 70) are raised on the scalp and forehead, using the superficial temporal vessels and the supra- orbital-supratrochlear system, but the number of vessels forming the anastomotic pattern, and their individual calibre, allows flaps with no overt axial pattern to be raised both in the scalp and forehead which behave in transfer as though they did have such a pattern.",
"together with platysma, receives the bulk of its blood supply from branches of the facial artery, mainly its submen- the transverse tal branch, and branches of cervical artery. It has little in the way of deep vascular connections.",
"The neck skin,",
"In the trunk, the deep fascial layer is not a very distinct entity, and flaps are raised in the plane of surgical cleavage rather than in con- scious relation to the fascial layers. The surgical plane includes the layer in any case since, depending on the part of the trunk, it leaves the underlying muscle bare or the aponeurosis covered with a fine layer of areolar tissue.",
"Perforating vessels emerge into the superficial fascia from the underlying muscle or aponeuro- sis through which they have passed. In the superficial fascia they run in an essentially",
"Posterior perforators",
"Anterior perforators",
"Fig. 4.3 The segmental pattern of anterior. lateral and posterior perforating branches.",
"intercostal vascular system with its",
"Fig.4.4 The perfusing system of the skin of the anterior chest wall.",
"Anterior perforating vessels. derived from the intercostal seg- mental system. shown in Figure 4.3. emerge lateral to the sternum in the intercostal spaces and pass laterally over the chest wall.",
"Fig. 4.5 The perfusing system of the scapular area.",
"The cutaneous branches of the circumflex scapular artery act as perforating vessels. and combine with the posterior perforating arteries of the segmental system.",
"horizontal direction, branching, and becoming smaller in diameter. At their peripheral extent they have a diameter similar to their main branches, and link-up with corresponding branches of the adjoining perforating vessel sys- tems, as seen in Fig. 4.1, to create the continuous vascular network from which the skin is per- fused. The siting of the perforating vessels is consistent, as is also their direction once they have emerged into the superficial fascia.",
"The segmental intercostal neurovascular sys- tem (Fig. 4.3) has anterior, lateral and posterior perforators. In the chest the lateral perforating vessels are in the line of the axilla and there is a corresponding increase in the lateral extent of the territory of the anterior perforating system. Branches also emerge from the pattern of vessels perfusing the large muscles of the shoulder girdle, particularly pectoralis major, latissimus",
"FLAPS 65",
"dorsi and trapezius. They contribute little to nor- mal skin perfusion, and play no part in the design of skin and fasciocutaneous flaps, but they have a significant role in perfusing the myocutaneous flaps which involve the muscles from which they emerge.",
"In the chest (Fig. 4.4), perforators emerge from each intercostal space just lateral to the ster- num, and pass laterally across the anterior chest wall, providing the basis of the deltopectoral flap (p, 91). In the scapular area, in addition to the segmental lateral and posterior perforating branches of the posterior intercostal vessels, cutaneous branches of the circumflex scapular vessels perfuse the skin area overlying the scapula (Fig. 4.5), allowing construction of the scapular flaps (p. 116).",
"Transversus abdominis",
"'-------Internal oblique",
"'---------External oblique",
"Fig.4.6 The segmental system of vessels in the abdomen.",
"forward in the intermuscular plane between the internal oblique and transversus abdominis muscles. pierce the posterior layer of the rectus sheath and reach rectus abdornlnls, anastomosing with the superior and inferior epigastric vessels. and contributing to the system of perforating vessels emerging from the anterior layer of the rectus sheath.",
"These vessels pass",
"66 FUNDAMENTAl TECHNIQUES OF PLASTIC SURGERY",
"Below the level of the 6th space the intercostal neurovascular bundles continue the initial down- ward direction of the ribs rather than pursuing the upward curve of the costal margin. This brings them on to the anterior abdominal wall (Fig. 4.6) where they run between the internal oblique and transversus abdominis muscles, reaching the posterior layer of the rectus sheath which they penetrate. They continue through the rectus abdo- minis muscle and emerge as perforators from the anterior rectus sheath near the midline.",
"Within the rectus sheath a further vascular system is present deep to and within the sub- stance of rectus abdominis, formed by the anas- tomotic junction of the superior and inferior epigastric vessels. This system intermingles with the segmental vessels and contributes to the sys- tem of perforators (Fig. 4.7). In the hypogastrium there is also an intermingling within the superfi- cial fascia of the perforators emerging from the rectus sheath with the branches of the superficial epigastric vessels, a component of the vascular 'cartwheel' arising in the groin, just below the inguinal ligament in the femoral triangle (Fig. 4.8). The main 'spokes' of the cartwheel are the superficial circumflex iliac and the superficial epigastric vessels. The superficial circumflex iliac vessels run laterally parallel to the inguinalliga- ment and provide the vascular basis of the groin flap (p. 92). The superficial epigastric vessels pass upwards and medially superficial to the rectus sheath. In addition to anastomosing with the perforators emerging from the rectus sheath in the hypogastrium they provide the vascular basis of the hypogastric flap (p. 93). Both sets of vessels run in the superficial fascia, becoming more superficial as they course towards their peripheral extent. In the limbs,",
"the deep fascia is a clearly defined structure and provides the 'skeletal' background on which the blood supply to the skin relies and through which it is distributed. It encircles the limb as an investing layer, fusing with the periosteum where bony surfaces lie directly under the skin, and continuous with the intermuscular septa.",
"In relation to flap design, it is the fascia of the forearm and the lower half of the upper arm, and of the leg below the knee, which are of greatest",
"Fig. 4.7 The perfusion sources of the skin of the anterior abdomen. This is provided by the perforating branches of the superior and inferior epigastric systems of vessels, anastomosing with one another within the rectus sheath, in combination with the abdominal segmental system of vessels (Fig. 4.6).",
"Fig.4.8 The perfusion sources of the skin of the hypogastrium.",
"These are formed by elements of the vascular 'cartwheel' in the groin. the superficial epigastric and the superficial circumflex iliac vessels which combine with the perforating system shown in Figure 4.7.",
"FLAPS 67",
"importance. Despite certain differences, particu- larly their comparative strength and relative flex- ibility, and the directional layout of their fibres, they have the same structural basis and vascular relationships.",
"A plexus of small vessels covers the fascial layer on both its superficial and deep surfaces, communicating between its fibres. It is fed from branches of the major vessels of the limb which pass towards the surface largely in the intermus- cular septa. These branches, like those in the trunk, are referred to as perforators and the sites on the limb where they emerge are relatively constant. Occasional contributing vessels emerge from the muscles, but, like their counterparts in the trunk, these are primarily concerned in the",
"perfusion of the muscles through which they have passed, though they contribute also to skin perfusion.",
"In the forearm (Fig. 4.9) the investing fascia is a fine, flexible structure. In the sites where fascio- cutaneous flaps are raised the muscles are freely mobile within the sheath created by the fascia and intermuscular septa, and the fascia can be elevated easily because there are no perforating vessels crossing the plane. The closeness of the radial and ulnar vessels to the surface means also that the perforators have a short course within the intermuscular septa.",
"The perforators arising from the radial artery lie along the line of the intermuscular septum which separates brachioradialis from pronator",
"Radial artery",
"Brachioradialis",
"Flexor digitorum profundus",
"Flexor pollicis longus",
"Fig. 4.9 The perfusion sources of the forearm skin.",
"These are derived from the radial and ulnar vessels on the flexor aspect. and the posterior interosseous vessels on the extensor aspect. Along the course of these vessels. perforating branches pass superficially in the intermuscular septa and form a plexus in the investing layer of the deep fascia from which the skin is perfused. The perforating vessels derived from the radial artery pass superficially in the septum between brachioradialis and flexor carpi radialis,the ulnar derived perforating vessels emerge lateral to flexor carpi ulnaris, and those from the posterior interosseous vessels emerge between extensor carpi ulnaris and extensor digiti minimi.",
"68 FUNDAMENTAL TECHNIQUES OF PLASTIC SURGERY",
"teres proximally and from flexor carpi radialis longus distally, and they provide the vascular basis of the radial forearm flap (p. 112).The perfor- ators arising from the ulnar artery lie along the line of the intermuscular septum lateral to flexor carpi ulnaris, between it and flexor digitorum superficialis, and they provide the vascular basis of the ulnarforearm flap (p. 114).",
"In the upper arm (Fig. 4.10), the lateral inter- muscular septum is attached to the humeral shaft, and between the elbow joint and the lower border of deltoid it separates brachioradialis and, more proximally, brachialis from triceps. This septum carries the posterior descending branch of the profunda brachii artery, and its branches perfuse the investing fascial layer and",
"through it the overlying skin. It provides the vas- cular basis of the lateral upper armflap (p. 114).",
"In the leg between the knee and the foot (Fig. 4.11), the investing layer of deep fascia is a strong, inextensile structure with a strictly limited degree of flexibility. In addition to the contribution it makes to the skin circulation, both it and the inter- muscular septa also provide areas of origin to the muscles. This is seen most strikingly proximally, the fascia fusing with the aponeurotic covering of the muscle, a mixture of features which has resulted in its being referred to as an exoskeleton. The anterior and posterior tibial, and the peroneal vessels, which provide the main perfor- ating systems, lie deep in the substance of the limb, each within its own muscle compartment,",
"Median nerve",
"Brachial artery",
"Profunda brachii \\",
"Brachial artery",
"Radial nerve",
"Medial intermuscular septum",
"Posterior descending branch of profunda brachii",
"Fig. 4.10 The perfusion source of the skin of the lateral aspect of the upper arm below the insertion of deltoid.",
"The posterior descending brancha of the profundi brachii, also referred to as the middle collateral artery, one of its terminal branches. passes distally between the lateral intermuscular septum and triceps, giving perforating branches which pass superficially to reach the investing layer of deep fascia and perfuse the overlying skin.",
"FLAPS",
"hallucis longus",
"Fig. 4.1 I The perfusion sources of the skin of the leg between the knee and the ankle.",
"Perforating vessels from the three main arteriovenous systems pass towards the surface in the intermuscular septa to reach the investing layer of deep fascia forming a plexus from which branches pass superficially to perfuse the skin.This results in linear patterns of perforators emerging at intervals along the septa which separate the major muscle groups, extensor, flexor and peroneal, and where the flexors abut on the subcutaneous border of the tibia.Where intermuscular septa are absent over a large area, as in the calf,vessels. predominantly from the posterior tibial vessels, pass directly through soleus and gastrocnemius, to reach the deep fascia.",
"and the perforators have a relatively long course in the intermuscular septa before they reach the overlying fascia. The muscle bulk of gastrocne- mius and soleus creates a considerable volume imbalance in that part of the limb, with an absence of intermuscular septa, and there the system of perforators using intermuscular septa is replaced by a series of branches of the post- erior tibial vessels passing directly through soleus and gastrocnemius to emerge and join the fascial plexus in the calf.",
"and posterior muscle compartments. From the vessels in the posterior compartment, branches pass medially in the intermuscular septum between flexor digitorum longus and soleus, emerging in the line just behind the posterior border of the subcutaneous surface of the tibia. Branches of the posterior tibial vessels also pass backwards through the substance of soleus and gastrocnemius to emerge in the midline between the two bellies of gastrocnemius, and also mid- way between the midline and the lateral and medial margins of gastrocnemius.",
"The perforating branches of the anterior tibial vessels emerge in a linear fashion along the ante- rior border of the subcutaneous surface of the tibia, and also along the line which separates the anterior tibial and peroneal muscle compart- ments. The branches of the peroneal vessels emerge along the line separating the peroneal",
"FLAP TYPES",
"On the basis of their anatomical content and the nature of their vascular patterns flaps can be",
"70 FUNDAMENTAL TECHNIQUES OF PLASTIC SURGERY",
"categorised into skin and fasciocutaneous, mus- cle and myocutaneous, and free flaps.",
"Skin and fasciocutaneous flaps These flaps rely virtually entirely on the pattern of blood vessels running horizontally in the superficial fascia, reinforced in many body sites by the rich plexus of small vessels in relation to the general investing layer of deep fascia.",
"With this as their vascular background, three categories of flaps - axial pattern \u00a3laps, random pattern flaps and fasciocutaneous flaps - are recognised, each with a distinctive geometry imposed by its vascular anatomy and each with its individual characteristics and behaviour patterns.",
"Axial pattern \u00a3laps (Fig. 4.12) are designed along pre-existing anatomically recognised arte- riovenous systems. Such a system running along the length of the flap allows it to be constructed as long as the territory of its axial artery with minimal regard to considerations of breadth.",
"Random pattern flaps (Fig. 4.12) have insuffi- cient pre-existing bias in the pattern of their arteries and veins to be of any value in design of the flap. The term random pattern flap wasoriginally introduced in order to distinguish it from axial pat- ternflaps, but the extent to which current knowledge of the patterns of blood supply to the skin is harnessed in the design offlaps has greatly reduced the number offlaps which can confidently be considered to have a",
"Random pattern flap",
"Axial pattern flap",
"Fig.4.12 Random and axial pattern flaps.",
"The presence of the axial arteriovenous system in the axial pat- tern flap determines the length:breadth ratio which is safe, com- pared with the random pattern flap where the absence of an axial vascular system generally limits it to a safe length:breadth ratio of 1:1.",
"truly random pattern. It is increasingly difficult to define such aflap other than in negative terms. Local and direct flaps which do not include thefascial layer, and the tubedflap where thinning has removed the fascial layer, may well be the ollly ones to which the term can properly beapplied. Because of the random nature of the vascular pattern of such aflap, it is sub- ject to limitations in dimensions, particularly in its permissible lengthibreadth ratio.",
"The difference in the circulatory dynamics of the two flap types is strikingly shown in the skin colour of each. The healthy axial pattern flap shows extreme pallor with virtually no circula- tion apparent in the skin. The healthy random pattern flap is pink, blanching on pressure with return of skin colour as quickly as in the surrounding skin.",
"Fasciocutaneous flaps have had their maxi- mum relevance in the limbs, where the role of the investing layer of deep fascia in improving flap perfusion has been most striking. Length: breadth ratio limitations were always recognised to be particularly stringent in skin flaps raised on the limbs. It has been in this respect that the situ- ation has been markedly altered by the inclusion of the underlying investing layer of deep fascia, making the flap fasciocutaneous, and in the process significantly improving its vascularity and safety. The effect has been to free limb flaps to a considerable extent from the length:breadth ratio limitations to which they were previously subject.",
"It has also been found in practice that axial pattern flaps are regularly raised which extend beyond the demonstrated territory of their axial arteriovenous system. The area outwith the axial territory found safe approximates to a square, and it can be viewed as being in the nature of a 'random pattern flap' on the end of the true axial pattern flap.",
"Muscle and myocutaneous flaps The principle of moving a muscle as a flap to manage the problem of a surface which is unsuit- able for skin grafting by covering it with the highly vascular muscle belly, on top of which a skin graft can be applied, has proved extremely effective, but in carrying out such a transfer cer- tain points of technique have to be observed",
"scrupulously if consistently satisfactory results are to be achieved.",
"The transfer must be made without tension or compression of the muscle belly if its blood sup- ply is not to be compromised. Embarrassment of the circulation shows in the appearance of the muscle fibres, with slight darkening in colour where the blood supply is inadequate. The need to avoid tension and compression means that tunnelling of the muscle through deep fascia or under skin to reach its destination has to be used with extreme discretion. In the lower limb, the deep fascia is strong and unyielding, and is more likely to be the source of tension or compression than the skin. There should be no hesitation in dividing the fascia widely, and even excising areas if necessary, in order to provide the muscle belly with a free passage to its destination. Allowance also needs to be made in planning for a degree of swelling of the muscle belly in the early phase after transfer. Muscle does not toler- ate sutures which exert significant tension or crush the fibres, and any sutures should only be of a tacking nature, used to hold the muscle over the defect without exerting traction. Associated aponeurosis or tendon should be used wherever possible for holding sutures, and it is for this reason that wherever possible a fringe of tendon is taken with the muscle when it is detached in preparation for transfer.",
"When the transferred muscle is being covered with a split skin graft, exposed grafting is desir- able to avoid applying pressure to the muscle bed. Delayed exposed grafting (p. 54) may be used, the area of exposed muscle being dressed in the interval. Alternatively, the graft may be meshed (p. 56) and applied primarily. Meshing allows any exudate from the muscle belly to escape without dislodging the graft, and the gaps between the strips of meshed skin heal quickly.",
"The clinical usefulness of the muscle flap has been increased greatly by including the overly- ing skin in the transfer, the skin element being perfused from the underlying muscle through the vascular connections between the two. In such a transfer the skin generally becomes the raison d'eire of the procedure, the muscle reduced to the status of carrier.",
"FLAPS 71",
"When they were first introduced, myocutan- eous flaps were raised with the skin extending over the entire length of the associated muscle so that the skin element had the benefit of its own intrinsic blood supply as well as that reaching it from the muscle. It is now recognised that the skin element can safely rely entirely on the underlying muscle for its blood supply, and it is now generally transferred with the muscle as an island. The attachment between the skin and the muscle is not always a strong one, and care has to be taken during transfer of the composite flap to avoid shearing strains and tension generally on the blood vessels passing between the two.",
"The combination of skin and muscle is the one attachment most between muscle and bone has also been success- fully exploited to allow transfer of vascularised bone.",
"frequently used but",
"the",
"Free flaps The free flap technique involves the transfer of a flap whose perfusion source is concentrated into a single arteriovenous system. With the flap raised and isolated on its vascular pedicle, the pedicle is divided and the flap is transferred to the recipient site. There the divided vessels are joined to suitable vessels, re-establishing effect- ive perfusion. When the method was used initially the flaps were the axial pattern flaps recognised at the time. It soon became apparent that the purpose because of the unpredictability of the presence, length and calibre of their vascular pedicles. The free flaps in general use today have a larger calibre of vessel and a longer vascular pedicle, both factors which make for greater technical ease and more consistent success.",
"they were not suited for",
"The principle of free tissue transfer has also been extended to certain of the myocutaneous and fasciocutaneous flaps where the perfusion source is particularly well concentrated, with a calibre and length which makes anastomosis relatively easy. The principle has also been extended to include bone in certain circum- stances. Where suitable, nerves present in the flap have also been sutured to a suitable recipi- ent nerve, motor as well as sensory, depending on the local circumstances.",
"72 FUNDAMENTAL TECHNIQUES OF PLASTIC SURGERY",
"In free flap transfers vascular input and out- flow are confined to the vessels which are anas- tomosed, and in this respect they contrast with their skin flap counterparts, where the pedicle attachment provides an additional perfusion source. The flap must therefore stay very strictly within the territory of the artery. The safe extent of the various flaps which are used in clinical practice is now well established, and will be described in discussing individual flaps.",
"FLAP GEOMETRY",
"Tension at any stage in the transfer of a flap has an adverse effect on tissue perfusion, and steps to avoid it begin at the planning stage. When the flap has an anatomically recognisable arterioven- ous system, it is on that element that attention is particularly focused, regardless of whether the transfer is as a pedicled or as a free flap. In flaps without a recognisable arteriovenous system, tension must be avoided throughout the flap as a whole.",
"Planning the flap with a margin of reserve is an additional way in which tension can be avoided. Skimping, making the flap just neat, is unwise, and it must not be sutured under greater than normal tension. If anything, tension should be a little less than normal. It is easy to trim an excessively large flap, but difficult to add to one, once begun.",
"Wherever possible, the position of the pivot point of the flap should be established at the out- set. This point is the centre of the arc around which the flap is moving in its transfer. The gen- eral principle that the distance between the pivot point and each point of the flap prior to transfer must not be less than the distance between the pivot point and the position which the point will take up after transfer holds good for flaps of all types.",
"In the case of a muscle or myocutaneous flap the pivot point is the site of the neurovascular hilum. In the case of a skin flap its position is less predictable, and this issue is discussed in relation to the individual flaps.",
"In the case of distant flaps and in certain instances where a local flap is jumping over",
"intact skin, pivot point planning is inappropriate and planning in reverse is used instead. With a piece of fabric to represent the flap, a mock trans- fer is carried out in reverse through the various stages of the transfer from completion with the flap in the recipient site to the beginning on the skin area from which it is to be transferred. In this way the patient is not given an impossible position to maintain at a critical stage of the transfer and the surgeon avoids a flap which is too small, too short, or liable to kink during transfer. The flap types which require planning in reverse are decreasing in popularity and the method is not often required.",
"The exigencies of the blood supply of the flap may dictate dimensions, shape and thickness which would not be necessary otherwise, and subsequent trimming, thinning and Z-plasties may have to be carried out after completion of the transfer in order to achieve the best result.",
"VASCULAR INSUFFICIENCY",
"In the case of skin and fasciocutaneous flaps, mechanical tension and kinking are two of the more frequent causes of vascular insufficiency. The avoidance of tension has already been dis- cussed. The effect of kinking is to create a partial or complete bar to the passage of blood across the line of the kink, and where the site involved is the base of the flap the entire flap is put at risk. It tends to be most serious when the flap lacks flexibility.",
"In the case of a muscle or myocutaneous flap, compression of the muscle is the most frequent cause of insufficiency, with kinking of the pedicle as an alternative possibility. Compression is generally the result of passing the muscle through a tunnel which is too tight. Deep fascia and skin can each be responsible for the tight- ness, the former the more likely offender where the investing layer of deep fascia is strong and unyielding.",
"The skin island of myocutaneous flaps is particularly vulnerable to relatively minor degrees of compression of its muscle pedicle, sloughing on occasion, even though the muscle may survive.",
"In free flaps, vascular insufficiency is virtually invariably due to problems at the site of the anas- tomosis in the immediate postoperative period. Its occurrence, recognition and management are an essential element in the postoperative care of free flaps and are discussed in that context.",
"FLAP NECROSIS",
"In a random pattern skinflap, developing necrosis presents clinically with the skin acutely con- gested and cyanosed, blanching momentarily on pressure, but with vessels rapidly filling again. As the condition progresses, blanching on pres- sure becomes less and less definite until there is clearly no active circulation. At this point the margin of the affected area is seldom well demarcated and the process tends to extend until a skin area is reached whose vascular capacity is able to cope not merely with ordinary metabolic needs, but also with the added vascular burden arising from the inflammatory reaction resulting from the adjacent necrosis. The whole process is acute, settled one way or the other in 1-2 days.",
"In an axial patternflap, the sequence is differ- ent, and the vascular pathophysiology underly- ing the sequence of clinical events is not fully understood. Necrosis takes several days to develop and during this period it is difficult to be sure whether the flap is going to recover or not. Instead of the pallor indicating a healthy flap, the area of concern is slightly cyanosed with what appears to be a sluggish circulation. The signs are not gross and can easily be missed in the early stages. For several days the appear- ance remains virtually unchanged, transient improvement often occurring temporarily, until finally necrosis becomes definite. The slow way in which the whole sequence evolves often gives time for the margin of the flap to become revascularised from the surrounding tissues, and the area of final necrosis, instead of being the entire distal flap, is an island in its centre. Once seen, the premonitory slight cyanotic col- oration is easily recognised and its appearance usually means inevitable necrosis, although sev- eral days may elapse before it is acknowledged as such.",
"FLAPS 73",
"In a myocutaneous flap, the sequence of events is more complex because two tissues are involved. Not infrequently the skin island alone necroses leaving the muscle bare but viable. When this happens the surface presented may be suitable for the application of a split skin graft. This is most likely to be the case when the flap has been used to provide skin cover. When the flap has been used to reconstruct an intraoral defect, it is rarely possible to graft the muscle surface, and spontaneous healing from the sur- rounding mucosa has to be allowed. In the intra- oral environment surprisingly quickly and the result when healing is complete can be unexpectedly good.",
"this occurs",
"The sequence of events which ends up in necrosis of a free flap is closely bound up with postoperative management and is discussed on p.llO.",
"PREVENTION OF NECROSIS",
"The most important steps to prevent necrosis are taken at the stage of designing the flap. In the case of a random pattern flap, it concerns such factors as its length:breadth ratio and making allowance for the normal increase in tension with the temporary phase of oedema generally seen in such a flap. In the axial pattern flap, design is particularly concerned with ensur- ing that the flap includes its axial arteriovenous system and does not extend beyond its recog- nised safe length. These factors all vary in the different flaps and will be discussed in relation to each.",
"When random flaps were in universal use the delay principle was regularly used to improve the vascular efficiency of the flap when it was considered to be inadequate. With the reduction in the use of random pattern flaps it is required much less frequently, though even with axial pattern flaps it is occasionally required. The tech- niques involved are discussed in greater detail on p. 77.",
"Postoperatively the development of a hae- matoma is prone to initiate the cycle of events which leads to necrosis. This complication occurs less frequently if planes of surgical cleavage",
"74 fUNDAMENTAL TECHNIQUES Of PLASTIC SURGERY",
"have been used when the flap is being raised, the vessels traversing these planes being large, relatively few in number, and more readily controlled. The use of exposure of the flap coupled with suction drainage has also con- tributed to the reduction in the incidence and severity of the problem: exposure by allowing continuous monitoring of flap perfusion, suction drainage by closing the flap /bed interface. Closed suction can certainly cope with a minor ooze, but the flap must still be watched carefully the local bulge indicative of significant for haematoma due to bleeding beyond the capacity of the suction drain. If this occurs, the flap must",
"be elevated, the clot evacuated, and haemostasis achieved.",
"In the past, many of the flaps in routine use had a small margin of safety and necrosis was an ever-present hazard. It is not surprising therefore that methods were described for managing the flap showing signs of circulatory embarrass- ment, such as cooling 'in order to reduce the metabolic rate', infusion of low molecular weight dextran, hyperbaric oxygen, and others. In practice none were effective.",
"The increase in the use of axial pattern and myocutaneous flaps has reduced the frequency of the problem. There is also a wider acceptance",
"Face",
"Scalp",
"Trunk-aponeurosis",
"-----,...---",
"Fig.4.13",
"The levels at which skin and fasciocutaneous flaps are normally raised in the scalp, face, limbs and trunk.",
"The difference in level on the limbs depends on whether the flap is being raised as a skin or as a fasciocutaneous flap.",
"of the fact that once any obvious cause of the necrotic cycle has been treated the surgeon is largely powerless to influence the course of events.",
"In managing free flaps, willingness to inter- vene at the earliest stage of concern over the state of the flap has been a major factor in the improvement in their salvage rate. This topic is discussed as part of the postoperative manage- ment of free flaps (p. 110).",
"SKIN AND FASCIOCUTANEOUS FLAP PRACTICE",
"Raising a flap (Fig. 4.13) In the trunk, the plane in which a flap is raised lies between the deep fascia and the underlying muscle or aponeurosis. In the limbs, it is possible to raise flaps immediately superfi- cial or deep to the investing layer of fascia, but the added safety which the fascial layer provides has resulted in its almost invariable inclusion. The face has no comparable natural plane and one has to be artificially created when raising the flap. The level chosen is the fat just deep to the dermis. This leaves the flap with the rich subdermal circulation present in facial skin, while not disturbing the facial nerve or muscles. In the scalp, the plane lies between the galea aponeurotica and the pericranium, virtually no vessels crossing the interface. In the forehead, the standard plane is superficial to the pericranium, but smaller flaps are often raised in the plane between the skin and the frontalis muscle.",
"All the surfaces exposed when flaps are raised if this is",
"in these planes will accept a graft required to manage the secondary defect.",
"Thinning a flap When a flap is thinned, it is usually in order to match the thickness of the defect, or to allow it to be tubed without tension. With the decrease in the usage of random pattern flaps, formal thin- ning of the flap (Fig. 4.14) is less often required, though it is still often desirable to trim the fat along its margin. Lobules of fat tend to bulge over the skin edge and their presence there",
"FLAPS 75",
"makes a neat suture line, marginal or along a tubing seam, difficult to achieve. The amount of thinning which flaps tolerate safely varies greatly in different sites and with different flap types.",
"In the face the well-developed subdermal plexus allows the smaller flaps to be thinned considerably, removing the greater part of the fat. With the larger flaps thinning is rarely required, their initial thickness approximating usually to the final thickness. Scalp flaps are raised at the subgaleal level and the physical character of scalp is such that thinning is not practicable. In the limbs, flaps are seldom if ever fasciocutaneous flaps because the thinned - investing layer of fascia which is forming their deep surface carries the blood vessels",
"Fig. 4.14 Thinning a skin flap, including trimming of the margins, to allow it to be tubed without tension.",
"In the case of an axial pattern rap, such thinning may have to be carried out with considerable care to accidentally avoid dividing the axial artery in the process.",
"76 FUNDAMENTAL TECHNIQUES OF PLASTIC SURGERY",
"crucial to their survival, skin flaps because the layer of subcutaneous fat is not thick enough to warrant it.",
"In the case of an axial pattern flap in the trunk, the problem varies with the site of the flap and the sex of the patient. In most males the chest and upper abdomen are not adipose and thinning is not often needed. Trimming of the fat along the margin of the flap may suffice. The presence of the breast in the female compli- cates matters when the flap encroaches on it, particularly where the breast is large and pen- dulous. There should be no hesitation about thinning the flap to make its overall thickness correspond to that of the part of the flap outwith the margin of the breast. The problem of thinning is less easily solved when the flap is being raised from the lower abdomen or groin. This is a notoriously fat site in many adults, and indeed the presence of fat in excess may be a valid reason for selecting an alternative site when a flap is being planned. This topic is dis- cussed in relation to the groin and hypogastric flaps on p. 93.",
"When a flap is being thinned, the hand hold- ing the flap for thinning should be used to judge the amount required. Touch gives a much more accurate measure of the thinning than vision alone.",
"the uniformity of",
"Avoidance of infection Many flaps have a less than entirely satis- factory vascular reserve, and unnecessary demands on the circulation are to be avoided. A particularly undesirable addition to the normal circulatory load is an inflammatory reaction, and two steps are taken to avoid it - prevention of haematoma and avoidance of raw areas.",
"Prevention ofhaematoma Assuming careful haemostasis at operation the most effective measure which can be taken post- operatively to prevent haematoma is the use of suction. The larger the area of the surfaces apposed by the transfer of flap the greater the need for suction drainage to ensure that the surfaces are not separated by haematoma, but adhere quickly.",
"Fig. 4.15 The ways of inserting a suction catheter deep to the distal end of a flap to ensure that the flap adheres deeply - by the use of a separate incision, through the marginal suture line of the flap, by passing the catheter along the length of the tubed bridge segment.",
"Where wall suction is available a wide-bore catheter with additional openings works well; alternatively, commercially produced suction drains can be used. The drain (Fig. 4.15) may be placed under the flap, either through the mar- ginal suture line or via an independent stab incision. If the bridge segment of the flap has been tubed the drain can be inserted along its length to lie under the distal end of the flap.",
"In addition to the potential it creates for infec- tion, haematoma has the further adverse effect of preventing rapid and effective adhesion of a flap to its bed, adding to the time required for the flap to settle in and soften.",
"Elimination ofraw surfaces (Fig. 4.16) The involved are the defect left by the raising of the flap and the deep surface of the flap itself. In each instance the raw surface of the secondary defect is eliminated by",
"raw surfaces",
"Fig. 4.16 The methods used to avoid the presence of raw surfaces during the transfer of the various types of skin and fascio- cutaneous flaps. A Transfer of a deltopectoral flap.The bridge segment has been tubed, and the secondary defect on the chest has been split skin grafted, with extension of the graft to meet the tubed segment of the flap.",
"B Transfer of a groin flap.The bridge segment of the flap has been",
"tubed, and the secondary defect has been closed directly.",
"C Transfer of a cross-leg fasciocutaneous flap. The secondary defect has been split skin grafted, and the graft has been extended to line the bridge segment of the flap. The technique oflining the bridge segment ofa flap with a split skin graft, as in C. is used when the shortness ofthe rap in relation to its breadth makestubing technically impossible.",
"direct closure or, when this is not possible, by split skin grafting.",
"Secondary defects on the face can generally be closed directly because of the laxity of the skin",
"FLAPS 77",
"locally. Elsewhere on the body, the size of the flaps usually raised and the relative absence of skin laxity frequently preclude the use of direct closure, many defects having to be split skin grafted.",
"The raw surface of the flap which is involved is usually its bridge segment, and it is closed whenever feasible by converting it into a tube. With flaps raised on the trunk tubing is usually possible, but virtually never with flaps in the face and scalp. Fortunately the vascular reserve of most flaps raised on the face and scalp enables them to cope with the added load of a raw sur- face, and infection from this source is seldom a problem. In the case of a flap raised on a limb, the raw surface involved is its bridge segment, and it is unsuitable for tubing because it is short and wide. Instead, the skin graft used to close the secondary defect is extended to cover the bridge segment also.",
"Use of delay The original use of a delay (Fig. 4.17A) was to allow a random pattern flap to have a more advantageous length:breadth ratio. With the advent of the axial pattern flap, the technique has also been used to extend the basic flap beyond its recognised safe length. The purpose of a delay is to restrict the flap to the blood ves- sels on which it will have to rely at the time of the transfer, without adding the strain of the actual transfer itself, in this way 'training' it to rely on these vessels, presumably by inducing in them a degree of axial reorientation, though this is unproven.",
"As originally used, an incision was made along the line across which the surgeon wished to cut off the blood supply. The blood vessels crossing the line were divided, the wound was resutured and allowed to heal. This divided only the marginal vessels, and if the blood supply entering the deep surface was also being cut off in addition the flap was elevated. In a difficult situation, the flap might be delayed in stages at intervals of 7-10 days.",
"When the delay is used to extend an axial pat- tern flap beyond its accepted safe length a similar technique is employed, elevating the extension to leave its sole attachment to the",
"78 FUNDAMENTAL TECHNIQUES OF PlASTICSURG\u00a3RY",
"A",
"B",
"Fig.4.17 The usage of the delay procedure. A The delay is being used to allow the safe transfer of a random pattern flap with a greater length:breadth ratio than I: I.The flap,outlined (I), with its blood supply coming from all directions, is raised (2), dividingthe marginal blood vessels other than those entering and leav- ing its base. The flap is sutured back in position, and 10-14 days later is raised for transfer. During the interval (3,4), its blood supply remains restricted to that reaching it through the base and this supply increases in efficiency so that it is capable of perfusing the flap effectively during the actual transfer (5). For clarity the blood supply entering the deep surface ofthe flap hasbeenomitted.",
"B The delay is being used to enhance the flow of blood across the distal attachment of an axial pattern flap.in this case a deftopectoral flap. (I) shows the vigorous axial vascular flow and the poor blood flow across the distal attachment prior to delay. in contrast with the situation (2) following the delay in which the axial vasculature has been divided. the effect being to enhance the blood flow across the distal attachment.",
"distal end of the basic flap. The axial pattern flap, together with its extension, is then transferred in the usual way. In such circumstances the added segment is described as having been delayed on to the end of the parent flap.",
"A delay may also be needed at other stages of flap transfer (Fig. 4.17B), particularly in the case of axial pattern flaps. When such a flap has been attached to a wrist carrier, or has been inset as part of a waltzing transfer, the next stage involves division of the base of the flap, i.e, its pedicle. Division of the pedicle has the effect of cutting off its axial vascular flow, and the flap is immediately downgraded to the status of a random pattern flap. Division also means that the flap is immediately dependent on the vascu- throughflow which has been established lar through its carrier or waltzing inset, and this may not be adequate to ensure its survival. The efficiency of its pre-existing axial arteriovenous",
"system is such that there has been little encour- agement for the flap to develop an effective new vascular attachment at the inset, and its effi- ciency must be enhanced before it can be judged capable of sustaining the entire flap. This is achieved by carrying out a delay of the pedicle with the aim of reducing the axial blood flow passing through it, rather than cutting it off completely.",
"The delay is carried out by partially dividing the pedicle but, more importantly, by making sure that the axial vessels, particularly the axial artery, are divided in the process. The effect is to alter the vascular dynamics of the flap by reduc- ing the perfusion pressure through its base, and encouraging flow through the wrist or waltzing inset. Such a delay is usually carried out 3 weeks after the initial transfer to the wrist or the waltz- ing inset. Full division of the pedicle is carried out a week later.",
"FLAPS",
"Failure to stage division in this way is likely to result in substantial flap necrosis. Staging of the division even of a random pattern flap may also be advisable if the adequacy of blood flow across an attachment is regarded as doubtful.",
"TUBED FLAP AND DIRECT FLAP PRACTICE",
"Tubed flaps and direct flaps are both pedicled, they differ in their geometry and their bu t vascular patterns. The typical tubed flap has an axial vascular pattern, and this allows it to be . long in relation to its breadth, making it possible to tube its bridge segment. The typical direct flap has a random vascular pattern, and so has to be short in relation to its breadth. As a result it can- not be tubed. With both flap types the transfer from the donor site to the recipient area generally involves more than one stage.",
"Mechanisms of tubed flap transfers When a tubed flap is raised and its bridge seg- ment is tubed in preparation for transfer, tubing is stopped towards its distal end, leaving an area of raw surface which is used to re-attach the flap in its new site. A raw surface similar in shape",
"and size is created in the new site, and the two raw surfaces are apposed to one another. Closure of the skin edges eliminates both raw surfaces and creates the new attachment.",
"The tubed flaps which are used with any fre- quency are the deltopectoral and groin flaps. The deltopectoral flap is virtually always 'waltzed' to its destination, a method of transfer which involves pivoting of the flap on its pedicle to reconstruct a defect within its reach, usually in the lower face or neck. With the groin flap, waltz- ing is also used when the defect is in its vicinity, for example the hypogastrium or opposite groin. Defects of the hand and lower forearm can also be brought within the range of the groin flap, and transfer to reconstruct defects further afield is possible by making use of a wrist carrier.",
"In a waltzing transfer (Fig. 4.18) an estimate is made of the proportion of the recipient site which it will be possible to cover at the first stage of the transfer, and the raw surface left on the distal end of the flap is designed to match it. The pedicle is usually divided 3 weeks later, and the unused segment of the flap is untubed and returned to its original site. This aspect of the transfer, the need to use a delay, and possibly also stage division of the pedicle before insetting, are discussed below.",
"Fig.4.18 Transfer of a tubed skin flap by waltzing.",
"This form of transfer is used when, for technical reasons, the entire defect cannot be covered by the flap in a single procedure. At a first",
"stage, part of the primary defect is covered by the flap,the remainder being covered at a second stage.",
"If such a transfer is to be completed without necrosis, it is essential that the second stage is preceded by a formal delay stage, as shown in Figure",
"4./78.",
"79",
"80",
"FUNDAMENTAL TECHNIQUES OF PlASTIC SURGERY",
"B",
"; ( 'I\" (!IIII/'",
"o",
"I JI",
"Fig.4.19 Transfer of a tubed skin flap using a wrist carrier.",
"When the single pedicled flap (A) is tubed, a circular raw surface is left when tubing is completed. A semicircular trap-door (8) is out- lined and raised on the side ofthe wrist. The effect is to create a circular raw surface corresponding in shape and dimensions to the raw sur- face left on the flap, as seen in A. The circular raw surface at the distal end of the flap is then sutured to the corresponding raw surface on the wrist. Depending on the destination of the flap,whether in a downward or upward direction, the attachment is made to the ulnar or the radial side of the wrist. The tubed flap is then detached at its base after a delay,as shown in Figure 4.17B, and carried on the wrist to the site of the planned reconstruction, where it is sutured to the defect. of the leg in C, of the masseteric area in D.",
"When the flap is transferred using a wrist car- rier (Fig. 4.19), its distal margin is designed as a semicircle so that when tubing is stopped the raw surface is circular. A similarly circular raw surface equal in size is created on the wrist by elevating a semicircular trap-door of skin and superficial fascia, the effect being to maximise the area of raw surface contact between the flap and its attachment to the wrist, and hence the speed and effectiveness of the vascular link-up.",
"The size appropriate for the trap-door can be ascertained easily by making a blood-stained imprint of the raw surface of the flap at the site of the planned attachment, and its site is the ulnar or radial margin of the wrist, depending on the plan of the transfer. It should be positioned on the wrist margin so that the turning back of the trap-door leaves the raw surface in one plane. In this way the trap-door lies smoothly back when suturing is complete, and the attachment as a",
", \\,",
"I I",
"I",
"whole runs cleanly off the limb. The other vari- able is the angle of attachment of the flap to the forearm. Consideration of how arm and wrist are going to lie at the next stage of the transfer will decide this. The 'hinge' along which the trap- door is raised will be perpendicular to the desired direction of the flap.",
"The next stage of transfer on a carrier involves division of the flap at its base. If the flap has an axial vascular pattern, division must be preceded by a delay at the base for the reasons discussed on p. 78, usually 3 weeks after transfer to the wrist carrier. The base is formally divided 1 week later, leaving the tubed flap hanging free from the wrist.",
"With the flap moved to the recipient site a length of the tubing is undone sufficient to pro- vide the necessary raw surface for the inset into the recipient site, where a similar amount of skin is removed, the two raw surfaces then being sutured together. Three weeks later the transfer is completed by detaching the flap from the wrist and closing the defect there, and completing its insetting at the recipient site.",
"Mechanisms of direct flap transfer The shortness of the standard direct flap makes it necessary to bring the defect into close proximity with the donor site of the flap in order to allow the transfer to take place. When the defect is of the arm or the hand, it is brought to the donor area, to the upper abdomen for example (Fig. 4.21A);when the transfer is to the leg or foot from the other leg, as in a cross-leg flap (Fig. 4.20), the limbs are approximated to one another, and a comparable sequence is involved in the transfer of a cross-finger (Fig. 11.19) or cross-arm flap (Fig. 11.15). It is with the two sites, donor and recipi- ent, brought into close proximity that the detailed planning of the transfer is carried out.",
"The 1:1 length:breadth ratio of the standard direct flap imposed by its random vascular pattern, although mitigated a little by its con- version to a fasciocutaneous flap, still has the effect of making the planning of the transfer a critical phase of the technique if flap necrosis is to be avoided. Planning in reverse, described on p. 72, is the method used, and extreme care is needed to avoid tension, shearing and kinking of",
"FLAPS 81",
"Fig. 4.20 practice.",
"Examples of cross-leg flap positions used in clinical",
"the flap, and to ensure that the patient is given as comfortable a position as possible to maintain during the transfer, immobilisation in that posi- tion being crucial to the success of the transfer.",
"The donor site defect left when the flap is raised and sutured to the defect on the recipient area is split skin grafted, and the graft is extend- ed to line the short bridge segment of the flap, so that unnecessary raw surface is avoided.",
"Immobilisation of the upper limb, to ensure that traction on the flap and shearing are pre- vented, makes use of Elastoplast (Fig. 4.21A) in conjunction with sand-bags and pillows, and the position which was set up on the operating table has generally to be adjusted when the patient is returned to bed.",
"When the transfer is to the lower limb, immob- ilisation by plaster of Paris is usual (Fig. 4.218), though it imposes its own discipline on the sur- geon, and it must be used with care. It can be applied at the time of operation, but prefabrica- tion has undoubted advantages. Preoperatively, with the limbs in the position to be maintained postoperatively to permit accurate moulding of the plaster to the muscular contours, lengths of encircling plaster can be applied at strategic points, and strutted together postoperatively, e.g. with lengths of broom-handle, to hold the system rigidly immobile in its correct position.",
"With the limbs involved immobilised for the necessary 3 weeks the flap is divided, an aspect discussed below.",
"82",
"FUNDAMENTAL TECHNIQUES OF PLASTIC SURGERY",
"A",
"Fig.4.21 transfer of a cross-leg flap (8).",
"Elastoplast immobilisation used during transfer of a direct flap to the hand (A). and prefabricated plaster fixation used during the",
"A problem with direct flaps in general is the joint stiffness which results from the unavoid- able immobilisation for 3 weeks. In the young patient this clears up quickly when the fixation is removed, but in the older age group the possibil- ity of permanent limitation of movement has to be seriously taken into account in weighing up the pros and cons of the method.",
"Flap division and insetting When a pedicled flap is transferred, at least 3 weeks have to elapse before its new vascular attachment is capable of perfusing the flap en- tirely on its own, and it is ready for the next stage of the transfer. Various tests have been introduced over the years, aiming to assess the efficiency of the vascular attachment in the hope of reducing this time. Each in turn has been discarded. The question more often should be whether the trans- fer is safe at 3 weeks. In such an assessment, the extent of the area of the attachment, in relation to the length of the tubed segment to be left lying free after division of the pedicle, is the most",
"important consideration, but the presence of sur- rounding scarring, the speed of healing, the relat- ive absence of induration and vascular reaction locally are also factors used in assessing the ade- quacy of the vascular throughput, and deciding whether or not it is safe to divide the flap.",
"When the pedicle is being divided prior to insetting it is frequently safer to separate divi- sion and insetting into two distinct stages, even when only a fringe of the flap remains to be inset. In the case of a direct flap (Fig. 4.22A), a wedge of fibrous tissue builds up at the junction of the recipient area and the flap, and it has to be dis- sected off the defect and excised to allow the flap margin to be inset neatly. With the tubed flap (Fig. 4.22B), even when the length of the flap lying free is short, untubing is similarly required. The dissection involved in each instance may appear to be minor, but it has an adverse effect on the blood supply of the segment of the flap which has been elevated, and the margin is liable to slough, creating 'rim necrosis'. Rim necro- sis is less of a hazard in the head and neck, where",
"A",
"Fig.4.22 Staging of division and insetting. A Staging as used with a direct flap.An angle of fibrous tissue is built up at the junction of the flap and the recipient site. and this has to be excised to allow the flap to sit into the remainder of the defect. The flap is divided at the end of the third week. but excision of the wedge of fibrous tissue and insetting are postponed for a further week.",
"B Staging as used with a tubed flap.The pedicle of the flap is divided at the end of the third week. but insetting is postponed for a further",
"week. The disseaion involved in division and insetting in bothinstances has an adverse effecton the blaad supply of the flap margin and. unless the two procedures arestaged, rim necrosis is liable to result.Theexcellent blood supply ofthe headand neckarea makes staging ofdivision andinsetting in this way less often necessary.",
"FLAPS 83",
"14 FUNDAMENTAL TECHNIQUES OF PLASTIC SURGERY",
"the rich blood supply makes it safer to divide and inset immediately, but even there the least doubt should mean a staged division and inset.",
"When a greater length of the flap remains to be inset, it is essential to carry out a delay at the base of the flap (Fig. 4.17), as described on p. 78, a week before formally dividing the pedicle and completing insetting, making sure that the axial vessels are divided. In a particularly difficult situation an additional precaution can be to postpone for an additional week the final inset- ting of the flap after division of its pedicle.",
"Clinical usage The 'waltzing' method of transfer is regularly used, as is the cross-finger flap reconstruction. Cross-arm flaps are occasionally used. The other forms of transfer have only a tiny role. Faster and safer alternatives which make fewer demands on the patient's tolerance are available today, and they are used only when these newer alterna- tives have failed. With the number of alternatives available today this is a rare occurrence.",
"TRANSPOSITION AND ROTATION FLAP PRACTICE",
"In order to cover a defect which the surgeon con- siders unsuitable for grafting it may be possible to move the tissue adjoining it in the form of a local flap. Such a transfer usually leaves a sec- ondary defect, and this is closed either by direct suture or a free skin graft.",
"When the flap moves laterally into the primary defect it is called a transposition or transposed flap, and when rotated into the defect it is called",
".-----",
"Transposition flap",
"Fig. 4.23 Transposition and rotation flaps.",
"a rotation flap (Fig. 4.23). Many of the flaps used in practice combine both principles in varying degrees, and a particular flap tends to be called then by the principle which predominates.",
"At theoutsetit must be stressed that these flaps are not procedures to beembarked upon lightly. The sur- geon using such aflap should remember always thata major vascular disaster is liable to leave a deformity far greater than the one theflap was designed to cor- rect. They cannot adequately be described fully ill print, for everyflap is an individual problem. III the face particularly, judgment in selection and imagine- tion in design come with theexperience born of surgi- cal apprenticeship. Present discussion is concerned primarily with explaining the principles which underlie their construction.",
"These flaps depend to a considerable extent on the elasticity of the tissues, but in planning this should not be relied upon. Rather it should be viewed as an added insurance. They are geo- metrical manoeuvres, and treated as such they are more likely to be trouble-free in practice.",
"Planning the flap The guiding principles (Fig. 4.24) to be laid down apply to transposed and rotation flaps in their classical forms.",
"With either type of flap the first step is con- version of the defect into one with the shape of an isosceles triangle - triangulation of the defect - a step which generally involves the sac- rifice of some normal tissue around the defect. In constructing the flap one of the equal sides of the triangle acts also as a side of the flap, and the effect of the transfer is to move that side across to the other side of the triangle, closing the defect.",
"Rotation flap",
"FLAPS 85",
"the better flap base from the point of view of tissue availability and blood supply.",
"Step 1 Triangulation of defect",
"With the triangle defined, the side with the greater area of available skin is likely to provide the best flap.",
"TRANSPOSITION FLAP",
"Step 2",
"Fig.4.24 The steps in planning a transposition and a rotation flap.",
"Step I selects the direction of the base of the flap. whether",
"transposition or rotation.",
"Step 2 selects the side of the defect on which the flap is to be",
"designed. and from which it is transferred.",
"The transposition flap is classically designed as a square immediately adjoining the triangulated de- fect, and its movement laterally closes the defect. Transfer has the effect of opening up a secondary defect which is of greater size than the primary defect. It is generally closed with a split skin graft. Although the classic outline of the flap is square, the ratio of its length to its breadth con- sidered to be safe depends to a considerable extent on the vascularity of the site from which the flap is raised, whether the flap is truly ran- dom or has an axial element, and whether it is a skin or a fasciocutaneous flap.",
"The shape of the initial defect generally deter- mines the shape of the triangle, its apex and its base, though with a long narrow defect it may be possible to plan the triangle placing its apex at either end. The base of the flap will be alongside the apex of the triangle, and therefore the end should be chosen as the apex which will provide",
"In the face andscalp, the richness of the skin cir- culation, even in the absence of an anatomically recognised axial system, permits length:breadth restrictions to be somewhat relaxed, frequently allowing the flap to be planned as a rectangle (Fig. 4.25), rather than as a square.",
"Fig. 4.25 exposed.",
"The use of a transposition flap following excision of a tumour of the scalp where excision left the bony vault of the skull",
"The excellent vascularity of the scalp permitted the flap to be designed with a ratio of length:breadth significantlygreater than l.Lrather",
"than the square design which is standard in other sites unless the flap is recognised to have an axial pattern.",
"86 FUNDAMENTAL TECHNIQUES OF PLASTIC SURGERY",
"In the trunk, the possibility also exists of har- nessing knowledge of the exit points of perfora- tors, and their inclusion will obviously enhance the safety of the flap, though in practice their usage has been restricted by the popularity of other reconstructive techniques.",
"In the limbs, the length:breadth ratio limit- ation of 1:1 applies with particular stringency when the flap does not include the investing layer of fascia, and even then such flaps have a bad reputation for necrosis. Raised as fascio- cutaneous flaps, their safety is considerably enhanced, and it has been found possible to relax somewhat. the length:breadth requirements Although this may simplify the transfer technic- ally, it does not alter the need to adhere to the geometrical aspects of planning the flap. An additional aspect of this added freedom is the surgeon's awareness of the lines along which the perforating vessels emerge, and the possibility of",
"incorporating one in the flap, a possibility enhanced when the Doppler probe is available to help in the search. They are discussed further on p.94.",
"The geometrical aspects of safe planning involve recognition of the fact that the point around which the transposed flap pivots in its transfer is not the apex of the triangle forming the defect, but is the other side of the base of the flap. In designing the flap, and before any inci- sion is made, the pivot point must be clearly defined, and the distance from it to each point of the flap compared with its estimated distance to the same point when transposition is complete. The diagonal length of the flap from the pivot point is the one particularly liable to be short, and the one on which attention should be concentrated (Fig. 4.26).",
"The effect of these planning requirements is that the flap is generally considerably larger",
"Correct design",
",",
"B",
"\"\"\"-,",
".......",
"<, <,",
",",
"\" ....... \" \"\"\"",
"\"",
"Pivot point",
"<,",
"\"-, \".............. -, \"",
",",
".......",
"Pivot point",
"Incorrect design",
"Fig.4.26 The design of a transposition flap.",
"In the correctly designed flap.the distance from the pivot point to A equals the distance to B and the transfer is carried out without tension. In the incorrectly designed flap.the distances are unequal because the flap is too short. and the transfer can only be achieved with the flap under tension.",
"than might otherwise be expected. In particular, the side which is also part of the defect has to be made longer than the side of the triangulated defect so that the diagonal length of the flap before and the estimated diagonal length after transfer are at least equal.",
"If the size of the flap is inadequate (Fig. 4.26), it will be found when transfer is attempted that a tension line develops along the diagonal of the flap. At best this makes the flap vulnerable to vascular insufficiency; at worst it may make the transfer impossible. The use of a back-cut across the base of the flap is likely then to be needed to allow the transfer to be completed, its effect being to alter the position of the pivot point to a more advantageous site from the viewpoint of reducing tension. Unfortunately its effect is also to reduce the breadth of the base of the flap and hence its vascular safety. When it is unavoidable, such a back-cut should at least be made as small as possible.",
"In making such a cut it may be possible to reduce the tension without significantly reducing the vascularity of the flap by cutting only the actual tissue responsible for the tension, at the same time leaving the blood vessels intact. In skin with a good thickness of super- ficial fascia, for example, section of the skin alone may give enough relaxation; in the scalp, cutting the galea aponeurotica may have the same result. In general, however, the need for a back-cut is the result of poor planning, and its use is distinctly hazardous as regards flap survival.",
"The clinical role of the transposition flap is confined to situations where a secondary graft is not contraindicated for cosmetic reasons and so it is used mainly outside the face. The secondary defect is larger than the primary defect, but any attempt to close it, or even reduce it in size by suture, is undesirable. It should be covered with a split skin graft.",
"The graft can be applied either primarily, using pressure methods, or delayed, using exposed grafting. If it is decided to use primary grafting, it is essential to make sure that the tension on the tie-over dressing is not trans- mitted to the flap. This can be achieved by ensur- ing that the tie-over sutures which pass through",
"FLAPS 87",
"Isolation of the transposition flap from the graft by the Fig. 4.27 use of sutures which anchor both the graft and the flap to the deeper structures. preventing tension from being transmitted from the graft to the flap.and allowing them to be managed independ- ently of one another.",
"the margin of the flap include the deep tissues in their bite, and so anchor both the flap margin and the graft to the deeper tissues (Fig. 4.27). This manoeuvre allows the flap to be managed independently of the graft from the point of view of suction, pressure dressings, etc. Delayed exposed grafting has the virtue of ensuring that any haematoma collecting under the flap can freely drain into the second- ary defect without creating tension in the flap itself.",
"ROTATION FLAP",
"The rotation flap is classically illustrated as a semicircle of which the defect is a segment. In reconstructing the defect the curve of the flap rotates along the corresponding curve of the other side of the incision outlining the flap.",
"With such a design, the pivot point lies at the extremity of the semicircle opposite the defect (Fig. 4.28A), and in the absence of local tis- sue laxity sufficient to absorb any tension differ- ence, attempted rotation of the flap results in lines of tension spreading from the pivot point which may be sufficient to prevent the transfer from taking place. A partial solution to this impasse has proved to be the use of a back-cut made along the diameter line of the semicircle",
"88 FUNDAMENTAL TECHNIQUES OF PLASTIC SURGERY",
"A",
"Without back-cut",
"Pivot point",
"B",
"With back-cut",
"Fig.4.28 Tension in a rotation flap.",
"The flap (A) without. and (8) with a back-cut. showing how the back-cut has altered the position of the pivot point and reduced the",
"tension created by attempting to rotate the flap.",
"(Fig. 4.28B). Its effect is to move the site of the pivot point towards the centre of the semicircle outlined by the flap, and this reduces the tension lines built up when the flap is transferred.",
"In practice, the larger the flap in relation to the defect the more likely the flap is to be transferred successfully without a back-cut, even when tissue laxity is minimal. With a large flap the relative",
"Small flap Large tension difference",
"amount of rotation required to close the defect is reduced, and there is a corresponding reduction in the amount of tension generated (Fig. 4.29). Even so, successful transfer of a rotation flap without requiring a back-cut, shown in Figure 10.5, indicates the presence of local tissue laxity sufficient to absorb the tension which would oth- erwise build up. In such a situation the position of the pivot point is extremely vague since the tissues along the entire base of the flap are in some degree taking part in the rotation process (Fig. 4.30).",
"Large flap Small tension difference",
"In assessing the suitability of a defect for reconstruction using a rotation flap the degree of local tissue availability and general laxity must be estimated, and the likelihood of the need for a back-cut considered, particularly in relation to the effect it may have on the vascular safety of the flap.",
"Fig.4.29 and its effect on reducing the tension of the transfer.",
"Increasing the size of the flap in relation to the defect",
"The relationship of the size of the defect to that of the flap required to reconstruct it is also a criti- cal factor in planning. Most of the errors made in practice are in the direction of making the flap",
"FLAPS 89",
"and the relevant lengths from it are carefully measured.",
"The management of the defect created by the opening up of the back-cut depends on the degree of laxity of the local tissues (Fig. 4.31). If it proves possible to close the defect directly, care should be taken to see that closure does not create tension across the base of the flap sufficient to jeopardise its blood supply. The head and neck areas apart, tissue laxity is seldom adequate to allow complete closure and split skin grafting is necessary.",
"Fig. 4.30 The vagueness of the pivot point when the flap is raised in an area of skin laxity. An example of this situation in clinical practice is shown in Figure 10.5.",
"too small. Such an error is less likely to be made if the outlines of the triangulated defect and the flap are formally drawn out on the skin before any incision is made, the laxity of the local tis- sues is dispassionately assessed, the position of the pivot point is sited as accurately as possible,",
"An alternative method of managing the prob- lem of a back-cut is sometimes used when the flap is raised on the cheek. With the flap rotated into the defect, the margin of the flap is shorter than the margin to which it is being sutured, and the two lengths are equated by excising a triangle of tissue opposite to where the back-cut would normally be (Fig. 4.32). In practice, as suturing of the flap in its rotated position proceeds, it be- comes obvious that there is a redundancy on the outer side of the suture line and eventually a dog- ear develops. Excision of the dog-ear leaves the two sides equal in length. The use of this method in clinical practice is illustrated in Figure IDA.",
"Fig.4.31 Closure of the secondary defect created by the use of a back-cut following transfer of a rotation flap, by skin grafting, and by direct suture.",
"The form which direa suture takesmust not havethe effea of recreating the tension which the back-eut was used to relieve.",
"90",
"FUNDAMENTAL TECHNIQUES OF PLASTIC SURGERY",
"Fig.4.32 A method of avoiding a secondary defect following the transfer of a rotation flap,which can sometimes be used when the skin is lax,and tissue is available locally. Figure 10.4 shows the method used in a clinical context.",
"The dog-ear o(the triangulated de(ea If the pivoting took place round the apex of the triangulated primary defect the resulting suture line would be quite flat, but with the pivot point elsewhere both in the transposition and rotation flaps, a dog-ear tends to be present at the apex of the triangle when the transfer is complete. It usu- ally settles with time, but in any case it is best left for subsequent revision if its removal at the time of the transfer would in any way jeopardise the blood supply of the flap.",
"CLINICAL USAGE",
"For their effective use both the transposition and rotation flaps require a reasonably extensive surface area unencumbered by any anatomical features which might interrupt the geometrical outline of the flap.",
"In the side of tile face and submandibular area, the site where the rotation flap has been exploited most effectively, the mandibulomasseteric area of availability must be assessed carefully, since it is its presence which allows successful use of the",
"flap. In the older age group tissue laxity of the face generally, and of the mandibulomasseteric area in particular, is generally sufficient to permit use of the flap, but this does not absolve the sur- geon of the need to make the assessment. Depending on the site and shape of the defect, the flap may be based inferiorly (Fig. 10.4) or superiorly (Fig. 10.5).",
"In the scalp, the extent of unimpeded surface available make it an excellent site for using both transposition and rotation flaps, but its rigidity and inextensibility make care in the geometrical planning of rotation flaps imperative, and a back-cut can rarely be avoided. The rich vascu- larity of the scalp permits transposition flaps which are considerably narrower than their length to be transferred successfully (Fig. 4.25), but their geometrical design limits still need to be observed scrupulously.",
"In the trunk, it is possible to add to the vascular safety, particularly of transposed flaps, by using the knowledge of the sites and the subsequent course of the perforating vessels in their design. The potential inclusion of perforators, however, should be regarded as a means of enhancing the",
"safety of the flap rather than a method of circum- venting the geometrical aspects of flap planning. In the limbs, the inclusion of the investing layer of the deep fascia has added greatly to the safety of the local flaps designed in the leg, particularly between the knee and the ankle, the area where there is the greatest clinical demand. Their design and usage are discussed on p. 94.",
"AXIAL PATTERN FLAPS",
"The axial pattern flaps which have become estab- lished are the deltopectoral and groin flaps.",
"DELTOPECTORAL FLAP",
"The deltopectoral flap (Fig. 4.33) runs horizon- tally across the anterior chest wall towards the shoulder tip from its base along the border of the sternum. Its upper border is formed by the line of the clavicle, its lower border is at the level of the anterior axillary fold. The first three",
"Fig.4.33 The outline of the standard deltopectoral flap,and sites on the head, neck and chest where it can be used for reconstruc- tion. The flap can also be used to reconstruct defects inside the arc formed by these sites.",
"FLAPS 91",
"Fig.4.34 A deltopectoral flap used to resurface the defect left following the amputation of the ear for squamous carcinoma, showing the extent of the upward reach of the flap,and restriction of the graft to the area which will form the final secondary defect.",
"perforating branches of the internal mammary vessels provide its axial vascular basis.",
"Clinical experience has shown that, raised deep to the investing layer of fascia and strip- ping the underlying muscles bare, it can be extended laterally without preliminary delay almost as far as the midlateralline on the deltoid muscle, and can safely be raised almost to the sternal margin where the axial vessels emerge into it, one in each intercostal space. The only artery of size regularly met in raising the flap is the deltoid branch of the thoraco-acromial artery. On the basis of comparative size, the second per- forating branch of the internal mammary artery is the most important of the arteries incorporated in the flap.",
"The flap is generally reliable, but any exten- sion beyond the midlateralline is unsafe, unless preceded by a scrupulous delay, and even then problems of viability of the extension must be expected.",
"The secondary defect created by its transfer is split skin grafted, and the site is an ideal one for is an delayed exposed grafting. The defect",
"92",
"FUNDAMENTAL TECHNIQUES OF PLASTIC SURGERY",
"extensive one and, grafted in its entirety, leaves a considerable area of grafted skin to be excised when the bridge segment is returned to its preoperative site following division of the pedi- cle 3 weeks after the initial transfer. There is a good deal to be said for grafting only the area which will finally be left on the deltoid area as the permanent secondary defect. The remainder can be treated as a temporary raw surface and merely dressed (Fig. 4.34).",
"Transfer to its destination is generally by waltz- ing, and the bridge segment is tubed. If suction drainage is being applied to its distal attached segment it is usually convenient to insert the catheter along the length of the tubed segment.",
"The deltopectoral flap is most often moved upwards in a quarter-circle, waltzed on its ster- nal attachment (Fig. 4.35) to resurface defects within its arc - mastoid region, ear, parotid, cheek, mouth and chin. It is capable of reaching about as high as the zygomatic arch. The zygo- matic arch is actually higher than planning",
"Fig.4.35 The slack skin available along the anterior axillary fold. taken up when a deltopectoral flap is transferred upwards, explains its anomalous pivot point. It also explains the unexpectedly long reach of the flap when it is transferred in an upward direction.",
"measurements would appear to permit, taking the pivot point to be the medial end of the lower border of the flap. This anomaly is explained by the fact that the lower border lies along the ante- rior axillary fold where there is a large amount of slack skin available, taken up when the arm is abducted. The inequality in length between the two borders of the flap which this slack creates means that any tension line developed during transfer tends to be along the shorter upper bor- der and not the longer lower border. In planning, therefore, the effective length of the flap should be measured along the upper border with the pivot point at its medial end (Fig. 4.35).",
"Although the most common transfer of the deltopectoral flap is upwards it can also be trans- posed to any area on the chest and upper abdomen within its reach.",
"The planning of the various stages of its transfer and their management are discussed on pp. 79-81.",
"GROIN FLAP",
"The groin flap (Fig. 4.36) is based medially and lies along the line of the groin, using as its arteri- ovenous axial system the superficial circumflex iliac vessels. The artery arises 2-3 em below the inguinal ligament, usually from the femoral artery, occasionally from the superficial epigas- tric artery at its origin. It runs laterally, parallel to the inguinal ligament, and at the medial border of sartorius gives a deep branch. From that point onward it gradually becomes more superficial, passing into the tissue which would be raised as a groin flap. Lateral to the anterior superior iliac spine it divides and is no longer regularly identi- fiable. The corresponding vein has a general pattern parallel to the artery ending at the saphe- nous opening which is very close to the origin of the artery.",
"In planning the flap, the anterior superior iliac spine, the pubic tubercle, and the intervening inguinal ligament are marked on the skin. The line of the femoral artery can be palpated, and on it 2.5 cm below the inguinal ligament, the origin the superficial circumflex iliac artery is of marked. The line of the vessel is then drawn par- allel to the inguinal ligament, and its point of",
"FLAPS 93",
"Fig.4.36 The vascular anatomy of the inguinal region, showing the vessels which provide the axial basis of the groin and hypogastric flaps, and the skin markings which are used when either of these flaps is raised in clinical practice.",
"entry into the flap can be marked where the ves- sel crosses the medial border of sartorius. With these skin markings, the flap can be planned to include the artery, although it is not essential that it should lie along the central axis of the flap. The usual width is IDem but extremes of 6cm and 19 em in an adult, and 14cm in a child, have been used successfully. The safe maximum length is difficult to define since the lateral ex- tent of the vascular territory is not known with certainty, but experience would suggest that if the flap is raised beyond the anterior superior iliac spine, the part of the flap beyond this should be square, i.e. with a 1:llength:breadth ratio.",
"though it may be necessary to flex the hip to reduce tension during the actual closure. If graft- ing is unavoidable, the method to be used depends on whether or not the secondary defect is overlaid by the flap. When the flap overlies the defect, primary grafting with a tie-over dressing is unavoidable; if the defect is not overlaid by the flap, delayed exposed grafting can be used.",
"The clinical usage of the groin flap is as a tubed flap to resurface the hand, as a local flap waltzed to a destination within its reach, and, as an extreme rarity, transferred further afield on a wrist carrier or as a free flap.",
"The flap should be raised to include the deep fascia. In making the upper marginal incision the superficial epigastric vessels are usually divided, and they provide an excellent guide to the plane in which the flap is raised. If the flap is raised through a plane deep to these vessels, it is certain to include its own axial vessels since the two sets of vessels, superficial epigastric and superficial circumfex iliac, lie in the same plane. In raising the flap, a key point is the virtually constant branching of the artery at the medial border of sartorius. When the sartorius muscle is reached, it should be exposed and stripped bare to just short of its medial border. Dissection can usually stop there in the knowledge that the artery is safely out of the way.",
"The hypogastric flap (Fig. 4.36) is raised on the lower abdomen with its axis passing upwards from the inguinal ligament along the line of the superficial epigastric system which it uses as its axial vessels. It has been used as an alternative to the groin flap, mainly for resurfacing the hand.",
"arteriovenous",
"Subsequent stages of transfer The modes of transfer of these flaps, their plan- ning and management, have been described on pp.79-81.",
"FASCIOCUTANEOUS FLAPS",
"Unless the flap is broader than average the sec- ondary defect can usually be closed directly,",
"The vascular basis of fasciocutaneous flaps con- sists of a plexus of small vessels ramifying on the superficial surface of the general investing layer",
"FUNDAMENTAL TECHNIQUES OF PLASTIC SURGERY",
"of deep fascia, fed by perforating vessels which reach it from larger deeper arteries. The system is best developed in the limbs, where the fascia is a well-defined structure, and it has been most fully investigated in the lower leg and the forearm.",
"In the trunk, an investing fascial layer is less obviously present, but when flaps are raised in the plane which exposes bare muscle or aponeu- rosis a layer is exposed with a clearly visible plexus of small vessels. This corresponds in gen- eral terms to the system in the limbs, although it has not been investigated with the same thor- oughness, probably because the other vascular systems which form the basis of axial, myo- cutaneous and free flaps have greater relevance in design of flaps generally in the trunk. None- theless, in raising axial flaps, the fascial layer is generally included, taking advantage of the additional vascular efficiency which it provides. In both the lower leg and forearm, the vascular pattern is basically similar, with individual per- forating vessels passing outwards from the main vascular trunks in the septa between the muscle groups to supply the plexus of the investing fascial layer. This results in lines of perforators along the axis of the limb (Figs 4.9 and 4.11).",
"Transposed fasciocutaneous flaps, proximally based, have been the ones used most frequently in the lower limb, but it has also been shown that the safety of cross-leg flaps is increased if they are raised to include the fascial layer, and fascio- cutaneous flaps have been raised and transferred with a distant pedicle. Their major use has been to cover defects at various levels in the lower leg, most often its lower half, a site incidence probably related to the fact that defects there, particularly those exposing the tibia, are not readily managed in any other way.",
"The vascular basis of these flaps is medial perforators from the posterior tibial vessels, or lateral perforators from the peroneal vessels. The site of emergence of the perforators can be identified in the line of the intermuscular septum, by the use of Doppler ultrasound, but it should be appreciated that identification gives no quantitative information about the size of the vessel or its flow rate. Flaps transferring skin and deep fascia from the calf areas medial and lateral to the defect on a long, relatively",
"narrow, pedicle have been successful, trans- posed through up to 180\u00b0, and constructed as large as 18cm x 8em, although the average size is nearer 15cm x 6cm.",
"Rigidity of the fascia tends to hinder transfer of the flap and, since the presence of the perforat- ing vessels feeding the flap and the fascia with its vascular network are providing the basis of success in its transfer, the use of a fascial back-cut to allow easier transposition must be carefully judged if it is to be used at all. As a result careful geometrical planning is essential. The limb also tapers towards the ankle, and in its distal third the subcutaneous border of the tibia takes on an increasing proportion of the limb circumference. This has the effect of reducing the size of the defect which can be covered from either side, and it becomes increasingly difficult to design a flap of suitable size which can be transposed into the defect.",
"The secondary defect in all fasciocutaneous transfers in the lower limb is split skin grafted. The result is a rather unsightly lower limb, in which skin integrity has been achieved at the expense of considerable contour abnormality. This limits the usage of the technique, parti- cularly in women.",
"Flaps of the transposed type can be raised on the flexor aspect of the forearm and their transfer is accomplished much more easily than in the leg because the fascial layer does not hinder move- ment of the flap. This, however, is not the com- monly used form of transfer. The presence of two arteriovenous systems, one of which, judging from the experience of dialysis, can be sacrificed with impunity, and the shortness of the perfora- tor vessels, have made it feasible to raise skin and fascia together with the radial vessels and the intervening system of perforators as a single package, perfused effectively from the radial artery. Such a flap can be transferred as an island on a pedicle confined to either the distal or prox- imal radial vessels depending on the geometry of the transfer. Elevation of the flap is similar in essence to that used in raising it as a free flap, and is described on p. 112 et seq. A comparable flap based on the ulnar vessels is also possible but it would appear to offer no special advantages.",
"FLAPS 95",
"MUSCLE AND MYOCUTANEOUS FLAPS",
"The muscles which are used as flaps, either mus- cle or myocutaneous, have a localised neurovas- cular hilum, as opposed to a segmental supply, which acts as the pivot point around which they move in transfer. When they are used as free flaps, it is their hilar vessels which are anasto- mosed in the recipient site. In addition to these anatomical features the characteristics common to those flaps in routine use are that they fill a regularly recurring need, are simple to use, have been found reliable and safe, and leave a mini- mum of disability from loss of function of the muscle component. They fall into two categories - those which have established themselves for regular use, and those which are recognised to have a valuable clinical role, but one which is strictly limited and largely occasional. The first",
"group alone will be considered in the present discussion. The second group will be discussed as part of the clinical the management of situations in which they are liable to be used.",
"Latissimus dorsi and gastrocnemius are the most frequently used muscle flaps; pectoralis major, latissimus dorsi and rectus abdominis are transferred more commonly as myocutaneous flaps. Latissimus dorsi and rectus abdominis are also used as free flaps, both as muscle and myocutaneous flaps.",
"GASTROCNEMIUS",
"Flaps using gastrocnemius (Fig. 4.37) have pro- ved of particular value in covering defects in the region of the knee and the upper third of the tibia. Each head of the muscle has its own",
"Fig.4.37 The gastrocnemius muscle flap.",
"Gastrocnemius has two well-defined dominant perfusion sources, both derived from the popliteal vessels, and one of which enters each head of the muscle close to its origin from the femur.Their sites of entry are used as the pivot points of the respective bellies when they are transferred as muscle or myocutaneous flaps.",
"96",
"FUNDAMENTAL TECHNIQUES OF PLASTIC SURGERY",
"neurovascular hilum close to its origin and the two bellies remain separate until they insert into an aponeurosis, common to both, on their deep surface. This aponeurosis, although in contact with the aponeurosis covering soleus, is quite separate from it until the two fuse below to form the tendo Achillis.",
"These anatomical features make it possible to dissect either muscle belly free of the other, divide its distal attachment, mobilise it towards its origin, and swing it around to its destination, using the neurovascular pedicle as its pivot point. The medial head is capable of reaching the upper third of the medial aspect of the tibia and the corresponding portion of the knee joint. The lateral head, less often required, can cover the upper fibula and lateral aspect of the knee joint. In the case of an acute injury, the skin inci- sions required for exposure, mobilisation and transfer of the muscle are usually dictated by the site and size of the exposed bone and/or open joint and any associated skin loss. In the absence of clear-cut the muscle can be exposed by an incision in the lower popliteal fossa curving downwards and medially or later- ally according to the muscle belly to be used.",
"indications,",
"Gastrocnemius is easily separated from soleus using finger dissection and the line between its two muscle bellies is easily felt through the aponeurosis which covers its deep surface and holds the bellies together. Mobilised deeply as far as the tendo Achillis, the insertion of the par- ticular muscle belly can be divided keeping a fringe of tendon on the muscle. Splitting of the aponeurosis on the deep surface in a proximal direction allows the muscle belly to be mobilised towards the popliteal fossa as far as required.",
"Gastrocnemius can also be used as a myocutan- eous flap, either medial or lateral, like the muscle flap from which it is derived, but it is not often used in this form.",
"The functional deficit which results from its use is made up quite quickly by the other muscles of the flexor compartment.",
"LATISSIMUS DORSI",
"From its tendinous insertion into the upper humer- al shaft the fibres of latissimus dorsi (Fig. 4.38)",
"fan out to form a flat.muscle with an origin which extends from the posterior part of the iliac crest upwards to the mid thoracic spine. The arteriove- nous system which perfuses it during transfer in its various forms is the subscapular, and it derives from the axillary vessels as they cross in front of the tendon. The vessels pass downwards on the posterior wall of the axilla towards the muscle belly, giving off the circumflex scapular vessels about 4cm below their origin, and con- tinuing downwards for a further 6 em as the thor acodorsal vessels before entering the substance of the muscle. Within the muscle the branching vessels have a course which is generally parallel to the muscle fibres.",
"In raising it as a myocutaneous flap, an appro- priately sized skin ellipse overlying the muscle is chosen, its long axis directed along the line of the fibres as they fan out from the tendon. Depending on the circumstances of the transfer the ellipse is sited over the upper part of the muscle, lying almost horizontally, or more vertic- ally along the anterior border of the muscle. The skin island taken from the anterior border can be extended anteriorly beyond the muscle, the safe extent depending on the size of the island.",
"Fig.4.38 The latissimus dorsi flap.",
"The vascular basis of this flap is the thoracodorsal branch of the subscapular artery with its associated veins and it is on the point of origin of these vessels that calculations of its pivot point are made. Used as a myocutaneous flap. the skin island is most frequently placed near one of its borders, upper or anterior.",
"FLAPS",
"The pivot point of the transfer is close to the point of origin of the subscapular artery. Over its initiallOcm both the artery and its accompanying vein are lying free of the muscle}and the length of the vascular pedicle which this allows makes it possible for a skin island placed at the far end of the muscle to be transferred safely over a much greater distance than is usual with such flaps.",
"The steps involved in raising of the flap for transfer as a free flap are basically similar to those for myocutaneous transfer} apart from the dissection of the proximal vessels where they are completely free of the muscle. The subscapular vessels at their origin have a substantial calibre and the length of the free vascular pedicle is considerable} both factors which make for a technically easier transfer.",
"In dissecting the pedicle proximally the vessels on its deep surface can be visualised by retract- ing the muscle and this makes it possible to tailor the pedicle safely} dividing the various arterial and venous branches of the parent vessels as the flap is mobilised towards the axilla. Dissection is continued proximally only as far as the geometry of the transfer dictates} but if need be the entire muscle component of the pedicle can be divided. With a pedicle reduced to the vessels alone it becomes essential to avoid all traction during and after transfer of the flap.",
"In its various clinical roles the most important virtues of the latissimus dorsi flap lie in the large area of skin which is available for transfer} and the distance over which it can be transferred with its vascular pedicle intact. The functional deficit which follows its use is also remarkably small. The initial bulk of the flap is liable to be considerably greater than is ideal, but the dener- vated muscle element diminishes in volume relat- ively quickly and the final result may be much more acceptable than the early appearance would have suggested.",
"When the flap is designed as an almost vertical ellipse over the anterior border of the muscle it can be raised and transferred with the patient supine. Flaps taken from other areas of the mus- cle generally require turning of the patient to a suitable position. Depending on its size and site the secondary defect is closed directly or split skin grafted.",
"PECTORALIS MAJOR",
"The vessels which provide the vascular basis of the pectoralis major myocutaneous flap (Fig. 4.39) are the pectoral branch of the thoraco-acrornial",
"Fig.4.39 The pectoralis major flap.",
"The perfusion sources of this flap are the pectoral branch of the thoraco-acromial artery and the lateral thoracic artery, although the lat- ter source is not essential for its survival.The 'defensive' approach to the flap, making use of the skin incision used in raising a deltopectoral flap, leaves the latter flap available as a back-up technique should the myocutaneous flap run into problems.The placing of the island which is shown is probably used most frequently, but variations in the site have been described.The muscle pedicle is generally made as broad as the skin island.",
"97",
"98 FUNDAMENTAL TECHNIQUES OF PLASTIC SURGERY",
"artery and its associated veins. These, together with the lateral pectoral nerve, emerge from the clavipectoral fascia 2-3 cm medial to the attach- ment of pectoralis minor to the coracoid process. The lateral thoracic vessels also contribute to the blood supply of the muscle, reaching it lateral to pectoralis minor. The vessels do not enter the muscle immediately but run in a generally downward and medial direction over its deep surface, branching as they go, entering the mus- cle and continuing in its substance. The pivot point of the flap based on pectoralis major is the neurovascular hilum of the muscle but, depend- ing on the geometry of the transfer, it is some- times possible to avoid dividing the lateral thoracic vessels.",
"The skin island which is usually transferred is placed below and medial to the nipple, about the level of the 6th rib. In this area the amount of skin which precisely overlies pectoralis major is quite small, and the island is usually extended beyond the strict confines of the muscle. How far beyond it is safe to carry the extension is not pre- cisely known, but 3-4 cm is generally regarded as the extreme, and the aponeurosis overlying rec- tus abdominis is raised as part of the extension. In the female the breast is a significant factor in siting the island below the inframammary fold, and in determining the direction of any extension, which may have to be medial.",
"As part of the preliminary skin markings it is useful to mark out the pivot point in relation to the coracoid process. Its surface marking of the hilum is 2-3 cm medial to the coracoid process, the bony prominence readily felt below the clavi- cle near the junction between its middle and outer third. The skin island to be transferred is then incised down to muscle or aponeurosis. The most direct approach to the muscle pedicle would use a skin incision passing directly from the pivot point to the skin island, but such an incision precludes simultaneous or subsequent use of a deltopectoral flap, a point which mayor may not be regarded as important depending on the circumstances of the transfer. The alternative incision, following the outline of a deltopectoral flap, and turning down to meet the skin island, leaves it still available in reserve if needed. With the muscle exposed over the length and breadth",
"of the pedicle, its fibres are incised and the com- posite of skin and muscle is elevated from the chest wall, exposing the ribs, intercostal muscles and pectoralis minor. The muscle pedicle is usu- ally made as wide as the skin island, although as the flap is raised and its arteriovenous network becomes visible the pedicle can sometimes be narrowed. It becomes apparent in raising the muscle off the deeper structures that many ves- sels enter it from other sources, but the arteriove- nous system to which it is restricted during transfer appears to be adequate. Elevation is con- tinued as far up as the coracoid process, disturb- ing the hilar vessels as little as possible in the process. With the lateral pectoral vessels intact, a trial of the transfer can be carried out and, depending on the tension produced, the vessels are left intact or divided.",
"It is often possible to close the secondary defect in the female by moving the breast with- out giving rise to unacceptable asymmetry. In the male split skin grafting is generally required.",
"The major uses of the flap have been in intra- oral and pharyngeal reconstruction, and in resur- facing defects of the lower face and neck. It has the incidental but not inconsiderable virtue that its muscle pedicle is able to cover and protect the major vessels in the neck, and this may be of particular value when these vessels are at risk as a result of previous irradiation.",
"RECTUS ABDOMINIS (Fig. 4.40)",
"The rectus abdominis muscles run vertically on each side of the midline from the xiphisternum and adjoining costal cartilages to the pubic crest, enclosed within the anterior and posterior layers of the rectus sheath, formed by the aponeuroses of the other abdominal muscles, external and internal oblique and transversus abdominis. Along its medial border the two layers of the sheath fuse with one another and with their fellows on the opposite side in the linea alba, a largely avascular structure. The formation of the sheath differs in the upper and lower abdomen. In the upper two-thirds, the aponeurosis of inter- nal oblique splits to form its anterior and post- erior layers, the anterior layer being reinforced",
"FLAPS 99",
"I",
"Fig.4.40 The rectus abdominis flaps.",
"These flaps are based on the vertical vascular pattern running on its deep surface and within its substance, together with the system of perforating branches which pass laterally in the directions shown. The superiorly based flap is used most frequently in postmastectomy reconstruction of the breast. The inferiorly based flap.with its long axis reflecting the predominantly upward and lateral direction of the vascular pattern in the upper abdomen. can be used as a free flap,or transferred as pedicled flap to the upper thigh and groin areas.",
"by the aponeurosis of the external oblique, the pos- terior layer by the aponeurosis of transversus abdominis. In the lower third the aponeuroses of all three muscles pass superficial to the rectus muscle, forming the anterior sheath. The poster- ior sheath is replaced by a layer of fascia, the transversalis fascia, and the junction line of the lower border of the posterior sheath and the fas- cia is referred to as the arcuate line. The rectus muscle has three tendinous intersections which are adherent to the anterior sheath; posteriorly it lies free within the sheath.",
"Accompanying the segmental nerves which supply the rectus muscle, a pattern of arteries and veins, running in the plane between internal oblique and transversus abdominis, reaches the muscle by piercing the posterior sheath. The communication between the subclavian and the external iliac vessels through the superior and inferior epigastric vessels provides an additional vascular pattern, the inferior usually the larger of the two. In approaching one another from above and below, each set of vessels runs vertically on",
"the deep surface of rectus abdominis inside the rectus sheath for several centimetres before entering the substance of the muscle, anastomos- ing with its fellow at about the level of the umbilicus, and with the segmental vessels.",
"Branches are given off from the combined sys- tem which supply the muscle and the overlying skin, the latter by a series of segmental perfora- tors (p. 66) which reach the superficial fascia by piercing the anterior layer of the rectus sheath, and on which is superimposed a pattern of per- forators, distributed around the umbilicus in the form of a cartwheel. The background plexus of small vessels in the superficial fascia (Fig. 4.1) receives a further contribution to the perfusion of the skin below the umbilicus by the superficial inguinal vessels, superficial epigastric and superficial circumflex iliac.",
"The directions in which the perforators run in the superficial fascia following their emergence from the anterior sheath determine to a con- siderable extent the shape of the skin islands which are designed to exploit them. Around the",
"JOO FUNDAMENTAl TECHNIQUES OF PlASTIC SURGERY",
"umbilicus the axis is oblique, extending upwards and laterally in the general direction of the axilla; below the umbilicus the direction is horizontal. The pattern of perforators does not extend medi- ally, but it has been found safe in practice to prolong skin islands for some 4 em across the midline.",
"The presence of a vascular input from both ends of the muscle allows rectus abdominis to be used as a muscle flap, based either above or below. The concept underlying its use as a myocutaneous flap is that if the muscle belly with its associated vessels is transected and ele- vated along with an island of overlying skin with the perforating vessels joining the two, both the muscle and the skin will continue to be effect- ively perfused via either the superior or the inferior epigastric vessels, depending on the level of the transection.",
"When the flap is destined for transfer to the chest, the level of transection and the site of the skin island would be the lower abdomen, with the superior epigastric the perfusing system. When the flap is intended for the groin, per- ineum and upper thigh, the corresponding tran- section level would be in the upper abdomen, perfused by the inferior epigastric vessels.",
"Transfer as a pedicled myocutaneous flap with a superior muscle pedicle is used in chest wall reconstruction, most frequently to recon- struct the breast after mastectomy. Transferred with an inferior muscle pedicle, it is used most frequently to reconstruct defects of the groin or perineum. With each transfer the flap can be turned through an arc of up to 180\u00b0. Transfer as a free flap uses the inferior vascular pedicle.",
"Difficulties are encountered in the raising and transfer of the flap, arising from the fact that the muscle is enclosed within an aponeurotic sheath. The flap in its myocutaneous form con- sists of skin, anterior rectus sheath and rectus muscle with the perforating vessels which con- nect them. To ensure the presence of as many perforators as possible, the maximum breadth of the skin paddle should directly overlie the rectus muscle, though it may extend beyond the sheath medially and/or laterally. The long axis of the skin paddle should also follow the direction taken by the perforators after they emerge from",
"the sheath, towards the axilla at the level of the umbilicus and above, horizontal below the umbilicus.",
"Above the arcuate line, this design leaves the posterior rectus sheath intact and strong enough, even in the absence of the anterior sheath, to require no reinforcement. Split skin grafting is capable of providing adequate cover of the sec- ondary skin defect if it cannot be closed directly. Below the arcuate line, the rectus sheath is lacking posteriorly, and a different approach is required, designed to conserve as much of the anterior sheath as possible, and allow the defect in it to be closed directly if at all possible, reduc- ing the likelihood of subsequent hernia. To achieve this, the sheath is incised vertically medial and lateral to the line of emergence of the perforating vessels, leaving the strip of sheath between, containing the perforators, to be raised with the muscle and the skin island. The per- forators are identified as they emerge from the anterior sheath, and approached carefully both from the medial and lateral aspect, allowing the width of the segment of the sheath which is transferred with the muscle and skin to be reduced to a minimum.",
"When a superior pedicle is used the skin is raised as a horizontal island, its level on the abdomen determined by the geometry of the its pivot point being a little below transfer, the costal margin in the line of the rectus muscle. Designing the flap in this way allows the skin island to coincide with the skin normally dis- carded in the standard abdominoplasty, and it is outlined and initially raised on the lower abdomen to leave a symmetrical defect, suitable for direct closure, even though a considerable part of the contralateral element may be dis- carded in the event because effective perfusion across the midline is limited in its extent. The part of the flap which extends across the midline is elevated as far as the linea alba and the ipsilat- eral segment is elevated as far as the lateral mar- gin of the rectus muscle. The effect is to leave the skin island attached to the anterior rectus sheath. The anterior sheath from the level of the island upwards to the xiphisternum is divided in the paramedian line and dissected off the muscle, freeing tendinous",
"it",
"from each",
"of",
"the",
"intersections. The segmental blood vessels approach the muscle from its lateral aspect, and this anatomical fact can be exploited to achieve a more avascular dissection by mobilising the muscle, together with the vessels on its deep sur- face, along its medial margin and working later- ally, dividing and ligating each neurovascular bundle as it is met. Below the arcuate line which marks the lower free border of the posterior sheath the inferior epigastric vessels and the muscle diverge making it possible to divide the muscle at the level of the lower border of the skin island in preparation for the transfer without dividing the vessels at the same time. The effect is to leave the rectus and the skin island perfused from below as well as above until everything is ready for the transfer.",
"At the level of the xiphisternum it is generally necessary to excise a segment of the anterior sheath so that the muscle pedicle will not be restricted when the transfer has been completed. When the flap is being used to reconstruct a breast defect it may in fact be preferable to design the flap on the contralateral rectus in order to reduce the arc through which the flap has to rotate in the transfer upwards to its destination.",
"When an inferior pedicle is used, the steps taken to raise the flap are similar in principle although there are some differences in detail. The site of the upper division of the rectus muscle is determined very much by the geometry of the transfer and the size of the skin island required. A long pedicle or a large island requires an oblique construction of the island in order to make use of the periumbilical perforators. A shorter pedicle permits the use of a lower abdominal island. The fact that the inferior epi- gastric vessels diverge from the rectus abdominis below the arcuate line makes it possible to retain part of the lower rectus intact, using as part of the flap only the segment of the muscle where the vessels are in contact with the muscle and providing perforators. Within the sheath, medial retraction of the muscle exposes the inferior epi- gastric vessels, passing upwards and medially over the fascia transversalis to enter the sheath at the arcuate line. Their mobilisation is technically straightforward, though branches pass directly",
"FLAPS",
"to the peritoneum, and care is required to avoid accidentally avulsing one.",
"The inferiorly based myocutaneous flap can be converted to a free tissue transfer with a pedicle length of 10cm and a vessel diameter of 3mm.",
"Both the superiorly based and the inferiorly based transfers involve a significant amount of skin mobilisation, the superiorly based flap con- siderably more than the inferiorly based, and drainage following closure of the secondary defect is essential.",
"The problems created by the need to restore the integrity of the anterior abdominal wall depend on the width of the defect of the sheath, and whether it is above or below the arcuate line. Above the arcuate line, the continuing integrity of the posterior sheath ensures that direct closure of the anterior defect, though desirable, is not essential to avoid weakness of the wall. Below the arcuate line whether direct closure will be possible depends on the width of the strip of sheath resected as part of the flap. This depends on a favourable pattern of perforators, and it cannot be reliably predicted preoperatively. Failing this, a sheet of a synthetic mesh is used to reinforce the wall. The use of the contralateral anterior rectus sheath as a 'turn over' flap has also been used, but experience is that they result in a weak anterior abdominal wall in a signific- ant proportion of patients.",
"The standard design of the pedicled myocutan- eous flap based on the superior epigastric vessels, or the free flap based on the inferior epi- gastric vessels, uses the pattern of skin island usually used in an abdominoplasty, and this allows the secondary skin defect to be closed directly, mobilising the abdominal skin and advancing it downward, as in abdominoplasty.",
"The effectiveness of the perfusion of the skin island using the superior pedicle, and based on a single rectus abdominis muscle, has been found to be unpredictable. The skin of the island which directly overlies the muscle is the best perfused, while the skin most distant from the muscle has the poorest safety record. This skin area is often surplus to requirements and can be discarded, but if its survival is essential, its perfusion can be improved in one of two ways. In both, the lower half of the other rectus muscle is raised,",
"101",
"102 FUNDAMENTAL TECHNIQUES OF PlASTIC SURGERY",
"including the perforators to the skin, and with it the inferior epigastric vessels. These can be anas- tomosed to an artery and vein at the receptor site, the technique referred to as supercharging. Alternatively, the inferior epigastric artery on the pedicled side can be anastomosed to the inferior epigastric artery on the non-pedicled side, referred to as recharging. The latter technique relies on the fact that a considerable proportion of blood flow through the rectus muscle is shunt- ed past the skin island and reaches the inferior epigastric artery. Venous drainage is via the cutan- eous circulation, and this as a rule appears adequate but, if doubt exists, the inferior epigas- tric vein can be anastomosed to a vein at the flap receptor site.",
"The main factors which mitigate against the use of the flap in any of its forms are obesity, because of problems resulting from fat necrosis, and pre-existing midline and paramedian scars, because these interfere with the skin circulation derived from the vessels which reach it from the muscle.",
"FREE FLAPS",
"As part of the planning of a free flap transfer a knowledge of the local vascular anatomy is essential, with a clear idea of which vessels are likely to be used in the receiving site as well as their probable normality. If the flap is required as a result of trauma, the effect of the injury on the vascular anatomy, and the degree of damage which the vessels have sus- tained, also need to be assessed, since local scar- ring makes dissection more difficult, reduces the mobility of the vessels, and makes their inadver- tent injury more likely. In making such an assess- ment, arteriography is only of limited value. It provides no information on flow volume, on the state of the vessel wall, and the severity of the scarring. A healthy vessel wall and an ade- quate pulse volume must be demonstrably pres- ent. Similar considerations apply if the area has been previously irradiated. In both situations it may be necessary to move beyond the field of damage to find a vessel with a healthy wall which is suitable for anastomosis, and make use",
"of a vein graft to bridge the gap. The presence of infection in the vicinity of the planned site of the anastomosis is an absolute contraindica- tion to the use of a free flap. Thrombosis is inevitable.",
"The vascular anatomy of the free flaps in cur- rent use is well established, and in raising the flap it is safe to postpone exposure of the vascu- lar pedicle until it is convenient. The calibre of their arterial component is also such that the adequacy of input of blood to the flap does not pose a problem. The corresponding factors regarding venous outflow are less well estab- lished, but a reasonable rule of thumb is that the vein which is used should be at least as large as the artery, and a second vein is often anasto- mosed in addition if it is available. The vessels selected for anastomosis in the recipient site should also be no smaller in calibre than the flap vessels to ensure adequate circulation through the flap.",
"During the transfer, the total operating time can be reduced by preparing the recipient site and raising the donor flap simultaneously. The time which elapses between division of the axial vessels of the flap and restoration of perfusion is referred to as the ischaemia time. To minimise its adverse effects, the operative sequence should be organised to reduce it to an absolute mini- mum by maintaining flow through the vascular pedicle of the flap until the last minute before transfer.",
"Vessels may be anastomosed by attaching the flap vessel to an opening made in the wall of the donor vessel in the recipient site - end-to- side anastomosis. Alternatively the donor vessel in the recipient site may be divided and anastomosis carried out end-to-end. The pres- ence of collateral circulation in most body sites allows diversion of an artery to act as the donor vessel for a free flap without compromising tis- sue viability in its vicinity, and end-to-end anas- tomosis safe. Following trauma, however, vessels can become virtual end- arteries, and division is then liable to result in ischaemia of the region they normally sup- ply. End-to-side anastomosis, which preserves the pre-existing flow pattern of the artery, then becomes essential.",
"is quite",
"When the surgeon is in a position to choose the form of the anastomosis, the relative diameters of the vessels being joined together usually determines the method chosen. When vessel diameters are similar it is usual, although not obligatory, to use end-to-end anastomosis. If the diameters are nearly equal, gentle dilatation of the narrower lumen will still allow end-to-end anastomosis to be carried out. When inequality is greater, be technically possible, but turbulent blood flow with thrombosis is then likely, and end-to-side anastomosis should be used.",
"end-to-end",
"anastomosis may",
"Much less is known about the venous side of the circulation, but the criteria used for arteries in deciding whether to use end-to-end or end-to- side anastomosis have been found to be effective also for the veins.",
"Instrumentation The instruments used to dissect the vessels free, prepare them for anastomosis, and carry out the anastomosis, are modified versions of instru- ments designed for other purposes, such as jew- eller's forceps, or for other surgical disciplines, such as ophthalmology. They are relatively few in number - a spring-handled needle holder; spring-handled scissors, straight to cut vessels,",
"Fig. 4.41 vascular instruments.",
"The 'pencil holding grip', used in manipulating micro-",
"FLAPS",
"curved to dissect, trim periadventitial from the vessels, and cut sutures; forceps, generally straight but with a curved version, useful when access to a vessel is awkward, and also modified with blunt tips, used as a vessel dilator to over- come vessel spasm. The instruments are held and manipulated using the 'pencil holding grip' (Fig. 4.41), and, in the case of the needle holder making sure that its mid point.",
"the needle is held at",
"Microclamps of various designs are used to occlude the vessels during anastomosis. They share the characteristic of exerting just enough closing pressure to maintain vessel occlusion without damaging its intima. Double clamps are available which also hold the vessels in position for anastomosis, but individual clamps allow greater flexibility in use, making it easier for the surgeon to control the degree of tension of the suture line, and ensure that there is an absence of torsion of either vessel.",
"VESSEL SELECTION AND PREPARATION",
"The vascular pedicle of the flap, both arterial and venous, must be long enough to reach the donor vessels in the recipient site with a comfortable margin and correctly orientated, to ensure that there is a positive absence of tension, kinking and torsion, each of which is a cause of turbulent flow and increases the likelihood of thrombosis. A healthy vessel wall and atheroma-free intimal lining, free of branches and valves (in the case of veins), in the vicinity of the anastomosis are also essential. Each of these is likely to create turbulence.",
"Vessel handling When handling the vessels, both of the flap and in the recipient site, before, during and after anastomosis, an atraumatic technique is essential. Stripping of the periadventitia is a powerful inducer of vessel spasm, and for this reason it is undesirable to dissect out the vessels cleanly at the outset. A cuff of periadventitia should be left around each vessel until it is being prepared for anastomosis under the microscope, and manipulation should be confined to pushing",
"103",
"I",
"FUNDAMENTAL TECHNIQUES OF Pl.ASTIC SURGERY",
"the vessels with closed forceps, or grasping peri- adventitial tissue. Any form of injury, whether crush due to application of forceps, heat due to careless use of bipolar coagulation, or stretch due to excessive traction, injures the vessel wall and may damage the intima, making the vessel liable to thrombosis. Side branches can be carefully coagulated using bipolar diathermy, but care must be taken to avoid the wall of the main ves- sel. Alternatively, ligation and division can be used, but the ligature should not interfere with the wall of the main vessel. It makes little differ- ence whether dissection is by scissors or scalpel, provided the main vessels themselves are not handled directly.",
"During mobilisation of the vessels, even the most careful of handling may induce a degree of spasm, and it is common practice to irrigate the vessels with topical antispasmodic agents such as local anaesthetics, e.g. lignocaine or procaine, or alternatively, papaverine. There is no objective evidence that such irrigation is of real benefit, but clinical experience has been that no harm results.",
"Vessels in the recipient site should be dissected free over a length sufficient to allow easy deliv- ery into the wound, and when anastomosis is to be end-to-side, delivery can often be facilitated by packing gauze swabs deep to the vessels in question. Prior to division of the vessels of the flap, as the final step in preparation for the is customary to apply a microclamp to each, and careful note should be taken of its orientation so that the vessels are not twisted about their long axis. Twisting of a vessel leads to turbulent flow and is liable to result in thrombosis.",
"transfer,",
"it",
"Flap transfer When both the flap and the recipient site are the flap vessels are divided at the pre- ready, selected point, and the flap is transferred. Depending on the local circumstances, the flap may be sutured to the defect around its entire circumference or merely held in position with tacking sutures. The purpose is to secure the flap sufficiently firmly that the anastomotic site will not be disturbed during any subsequent suturing.",
"Only when the macroscopic preparations are complete, with the vessels orientated correctly, and approximated to each other in a tension-free position for easy anastomosis, is the microscope brought in. In adjusting the microscope the comfort andease of the surgeon has absolute priority, with the table at the correct height and the seat stable, and tile surgeon's wrists and elbows supported. Positioned awkwardly, the surgeon quickly tires, and is more likely to make errors. Competent assistance is also highlydesirable.",
"Preparation for anastomosis Formal preparation of the vessels should be thorough, and demonstrably complete, before any suturing is begun, so that there is no sub- sequent unnecessary delay in the re-establishment of the circulation. Under the microscope, as in manipulation with the naked eye, vessels may be pushed to and fro with closed forceps, but must not be handled or grasped other than by the periadventitia.",
"The presence of periadventitial tissue in the lumen of the vessel, either loose or attached to the wall, will induce thrombosis, and as part of the final preparation of the vessel for end-to-end is anastomosis removed for 2-3mm back from its cut end (Fig. 4.42). In preparing the vessel for end-to-side anastomosis, periadventitial tissue should be removed over a 1 em length of the receiving ves- sel (Fig. 4.43).",
"the",
"periadventitial",
"tissue",
"Fig. 4.42 Removal of the periadventitia in preparation for end to-end anastomosis.",
"A background for the various microsurgical manipulations. provided by a strip of coloured plastic tape placed behind the vessels, is felt by some surgeons to give a betterview of the anastomosis.",
"Fig. 4.43 Removal of periadventitia in preparation for end-to- side anastomosis.",
"Fig. 4.44",
"Flushing out the lumen of the vessel.",
"As a final step, it is customary to trim the cut end of the vessel to ensure that all trauma- tised tissue has been removed, leaving the mar- gin smooth and healthy. Vessels may be cut obliquely or transversely according to personal preference, but crushing of the cut end of the vessel and contact with the intima should be avoided.",
"The lumen of the vessel should be flushed out at regular intervals (Fig. 4.44) with heparinised Ringer's lactate or Hartmann's solution while the anastomosis is being fashioned to remove any small thrombi, and the operating field should similarly be kept moistened.",
"Immediately before the anastomosis is begun, the vessel ends are dilated with forceps or the specifically designed vessel dilators. The instru- ment is introduced into the lumen with the jaws closed, and gently allowed to open, stretching the vessel slightly, opening its lumen and counteracting any spasm (Fig. 4.45).",
"FLAPS",
"Fig. 4.45 The use of the vessel dilator to counteract spasm of the vessel.",
"Fig.4.46 Making an opening in the side of the receptor vessel in preparation for end-to-side anastomosis.",
"Preparation for end-to-side anastomosis If an end-to-side anastomosis is to be performed, microclamps are first applied to the receptor ves- sel on each side of the site chosen, and the open- ing is made on the same side as the flap, either by incising the wall longitudinally with a scalpel, in which case the elastic fibres in the wall retract and form a round or oval opening or, more com- monly, by excising a circular portion of the wall (Fig. 4.46). The making of such an opening, with its necessary smooth margin, can be technically quite difficult.",
"ANASTOMOTIC TECHNIQUE",
"Anastomosis is carried out using a fine monofila- ment suture, usually nylon, which can vary in thickness from 8/0 to 11/0 depending on the size of the vessels and the individual preference of the operator. Interrupted sutures are always",
"105",
"106 FUNDAMENTAL TECHNIQUES Of PlASTIC SURGERY",
"Fig.4.47 Steps in carrying out end-to-end anastomosis. I The needle is inserted vertically through the vessel wall from adventitia to lumen. at a distance from the cut end of the vessel of twice the thickness of the vessel wall.The vessel wall is supported on each side of the point of insertion. 2,3 The needle is inserted from the lumen to the adventitial surface, with the vessel being manipulated by the periadventitia. 4,5,6,7 The vessel ends are approximated, and the knot tied.",
"used (Fig. 4.47), placed at regular intervals around the circumference with the needle insert- ed at a distance from the cut end of the vessel roughly equal to twice the thickness of its wall. The needle should be inserted vertically through the vessel wall, from the adventitia into the lumen in a single smooth movement, stabilising the vessel wall with closed forceps inserted into the lumen and opened slightly. Pressed lightly against the intima on each side of where the needle will penetrate they exert gentle counter pressure. The needle is drawn through, and then inserted through the wall of the other vessel from intima outwards. The vessel ends are drawn together and the suture is tied with the knot on the outside of the vessel. The precise",
"placement of the knot is not of great importance in end-to-side in end-to-end suturing, but anastomosis the knot should be placed on the flap vessel side as this helps it to 'snug down' in position.",
"Suturing sequence The sequence in which the sutures are placed may vary, but the same technique is used for each individual suture.",
"For end-to-end anastomosis, a suture is inserted at each end of the opening. The back wall is then sutured, followed by the front wall (Fig. 4.48).",
"For end-to-side anastomosis, the triangulation technique classically described by Carrel is stan- dard. The technique involves the insertion of",
"FLAPS",
"Fig.4.48 The steps in end-to-side anastomosis. showing completion of the suturing of the back wall. followed by suturing of the front wall.",
"three key sutures at equal distances around the circumference of the line of the anastomosis, the intervening gaps being filled in with additional sutures (Fig. 4.49).",
"The first two of the key sutures are inserted 120\u00b0 apart, and the additional sutures inserted between. The vessels are turned over, and the third key suture is placed in the middle of the back wall equidistant from the first two. The intervening gaps are then closed. The distance between indi- vidual sutures should be such that the vessel ends are completely apposed leaving no holes between, through which blood can escape.",
"circumstances in the individual case. If one ves- sellies deep to the other, the deeper anastomosis should be completed first.",
"In carrying out vessel anastomoses, a problem which the surgeon faces is what to do with the needle while the instrumental tying of each suture is being carried out. It is essential that it should be kept visible in the field, ready to be picked up when the ends of the completed knot are cut. A solution is to insert its tip into the gauze swab usually in the field (Fig. 4.50), present to soak up excess irrigation fluid.",
"The sequence in which the vessels are anasto- mosed is to some extent a matter of personal preference, and is often dictated by the",
"When both anastomoses, arterial and venous, are completed the circulation is restored by removing the microclamps, starting with the clamp distal to the venous anastomosis, working",
"107",
"108 FUNDAMENTAL TECHNIQUES OF PLASTIC SURGERY",
"Fig.4.49 The sequence which is used in end-to-end anastomosis, showing the insertion of three key sutures at equal distances around the circumference of the line of the anastomosis, and completion with sutures to close the intervening gaps.",
"back against the direction of flow, and finishing with the clamp proximal to the arterial anasto- mosis. The clamp distal to any anastomosis in the direction offlow should always be removed first, other- wise the build-up of pressure is liable to result in leakage of blood from theanastomosis, and thrombosis may result.",
"When the clamps are opened, and blood passes across the anastomosis there may be a",
"little bleeding from between sutures, but this subsides quickly. An obvious source of leakage calls for additional sutures. It may take a few moments for the flap to become pink, and the first sign of circulation is often filling of the vein. At first, flow may be sluggish, but it usually picks up quickly. A bounding, pulsatile artery, a pink flap, and a full vein are signs of a healthy, satisfactory circulation. If this is not rapidly",
"Fig. 4.50 The use of a gauze swab into which the needle can be inserted in order to keep it within the visual field while it is not being used.",
"forthcoming, the cause must be sought. Arterial spasm can be corrected by topical application of a dilating agent such as local anaesthetic or papaverine, but if this fails it is better to the anastomosis and take down or refashion it. Expectant management merely postpones the inevitable. The same applies to venous problems.",
"resect",
"Test for patency (Fig. 4.51) If doubt exists, patency can be tested by occlud- ing the vessel distal to the anastomosis with two microforceps placed side by side. Blood is milked distally by the distal forceps leaving an empty portion of vessel. The proximal forceps are opened and, if the empty portion fills, it means that the anastomosis is patent.",
"With the anastomoses complete and function- ing, the vessels usually take up a 'natural posi- tion' in which they curve or loop gently, but the surgeon must also see that there is no kinking or compression. The final step in the procedure is the insertion of a drain under the flap. If suction drainage is being used it should be applied at a distance from the site of the anastomosis, prefer- ably fixed in position by using a transfixing suture through drain and skin.",
"FLAPS",
"109",
"Fig. 4.51 anastomosis.",
"The method of",
"testing for patency of",
"the vessel",
"Vein grafts On occasion when planning reconstruction it the intended is clear free flap lacks the pedicle length to reach adequate, receptor vessels. This deficiency may not be apparent until the pro- cedure is underway. Whether no alternative reconstruction is possible or whether past the point of no return, this shortfall, due to an inher- ently or unexpectedly short flap pedicle or due to fibrosis of receptor vessels resulting from trauma or irradiation, can be overcome by use of vein grafts.",
"from the outset",
"that",
"healthy",
"110 FUNDAMENTAL TECHNIQUES OF PlASTIC SURGERY",
"Sections of superficial vein from the limbs - basilic or cephalic in the arm, short or long saphenous in the leg - can be harvested and inserted between receptor and flap vessels as a vascular conduit to restore a circulation. Care is required to select a vessel of suitable calibre to provide a reasonable match for the vessels to which the graft is to be anastomosed. Harvest of the vein graft should be atraumatic, with careful bipolar coagulation or ligation of side branches. The length and axial orientation need to be accurate when it is inserted into importantly the direction the defect. Most must be adjusted to take account of the valves in the vein graft. Consequently, the graft must be reversed before insertion into the arterial side of the circulation, and be orientated nor- mally for bridging the venous deficit. Con- siderable dilatation of vein grafts bridging arterial defects is the norm. This creates a tendency to turbulent flow and, because there are four rather than two anastomoses, the vascular com- plication rate due to thrombosis tends to be high- er than usual. The technique of microvascular suture is unaltered and each anastomosis can be end-to-end or end-to-side as local circumstances dictate.",
"POSTOPERATIVE MANAGEMENT",
"Free flaps are at their most vulnerable during the first 72 hours after operation, and most compli- cations arise during this period. Things can go wrong later, but they do so sufficiently rarely that the first 3 days can be regarded as the dan- ger period when observation should be most acute. Complications arising more than 3 days postoperatively tend to carry a bad prognosis, and appear to be little affected by surgical intervention.",
"The postoperative course of a successful free flap is not unlike that of a successful pedicled flap. Oedema is usual after 24-48 hours and it begins to settle after 72 hours. Transitory oedema is normal in pedicled random pattern flaps, but it is less marked than in the average free flap. Satisfactory progress is indicated by a flap with a definite pink colour, blanching on pressure,",
"not unlike a healthy random pattern flap. Deviation from this pattern should give rise to suspicion that an anastomosis is not functioning properly.",
"A flap which looks 'collapsed and empty', fails to blanche on pressure and feels cold, is almost certainly suffering from arterial insufficiency, due either to spasm or thrombosis. These are dis- tinguished clinically by stabbing the flap with a wide-bore hypodermic needle - if spasm is pres- ent, some bleeding will be seen, although reduced in quantity, but no bleeding occurs if the vessel is thrombosed. The distinction is essentially academic, arterial spasm almost invariably progressing to thrombosis at the anastomosis.",
"Excessive swelling of the flap, cyanosis, cool- ness, and venous stasis on pressure are indica- tive of venous thrombosis or insufficiency. Venous problems are much commoner than arterial problems.",
"Various attempts have been made to provide an objective continuous assessment of the cir- culatory state of free flaps, using plethysmo- graphy in its various forms, Doppler ultrasound, temperature, and percutaneous oxygen tension measurements. None of these are entirely satisfactory, and they can, in fact, be misleading. The decision as to whether the anastomosis needs to be revised is essentially a clinical one, and the rule is simple. When in doubt, re-explore. Flaps do not suffer as a result of re-exploration. It is postponement of exploration and revision in the forlorn hope of spontaneous improve- ment which prejudices the survival of the flap, and may convert probable into inevitable flap loss.",
"The use of pharmaceutical agents to help maintain patency of the anastomoses and good perfusion of the flap has been described. Despite their theoretical virtues, little convincing evid- ence has been produced that they reduce the incidence of thrombosis. In the heyday of the tube pedicle a comparable pharmaceutical approach was recommended in the generally vain efforts to rescue the failing flap. With pedi- cled flaps the solution lay in designing safer flaps; with free flaps the solution lies in good anastomotic technique.",
"OMENTAL FLAP",
"The surgeon is occasionally confronted with a large defect which requires reconstruction without delay, which will not accept a free skin graft, and for which, for technical reasons, no flap is suitable, whether skin, fasciocutaneous, muscle or myocutaneous, pedicled or free. The sites most likely to give rise to such a problem are the scalp and the anterior chest wall. In the scalp area, the form the problem takes is how to provide cover as rapidly as possible for the defect with an extensive area of bare bone on the vault of the skull, and prevent it from progressing to sequestration of the outer table. In the chest wall, the problem concerns the extensive defect, usually from a combination of breast surgery and radiation, which is clearly incapable of granulating.",
"A possible solution in both situations may be to cover the defect with a tissue which will produce granulations rapidly and effectively,",
"Fig.4.52 The omental flap. pedicled on the right gastro-epiploic vessels.",
"FLAPS",
"and provide a surface which will then accept a free skin graft. The omentum is such a tissue (Fig. 4.52), and it has the additional virtue of being able to fill a dead space with extremely vascular tissue, of particular value when the space is chronically infected, or the result of radiation injury.",
"transfer, it is first freed from its avascular attachments leaving it attached to the transverse colon, along the greater curvature of the stomach. It is vascularised from branches of the epiploic vessels which form a series of loops in the direction of its free border. For transfer as a pedicled flap, it is usually pedicled on the right gastro-epiploic vessels, the larger of the two, the branches to though either can be used, the stomach being divided to allow it to be mobilised. Its looped vascular pattern allows it to be lengthened without losing its vascula- rity, and the calibre of its vessels makes its transfer as a free flap technically straight- forward.",
"In preparing the omentum for",
"Used as afree flap, omentum can be transferred to the scalp area, using the superficial temporal vessels for anastomosis.",
"Used as a pedicled flap, it can be used to cover the anterior chest wall. It is harvested using a linea alba approach, leaving a gap in its upper end to allow its transfer.",
"Depending on the degree of adiposity of the patient the omentum can either be a substantial structure containing a proportion of fat, or apparently insubstantial. Regardless of which form it takes, when spread over the defect and tacked to its margins, it produces granulations with remarkable speed, and accepts a split skin graft readily.",
"The use of omentum has obvious disadvan- tages, with the need for a laparotomy, and the postoperative discomfort and degree of immobility of the patient which is inevitable. The the omentum can provide cannot be assessed preoperatively, nor can the effect on it of previous abdominal surgery. It is generally used only when every alternative has been considered and none has been found suitable. In such a situation its ad- verse features have to be accepted.",
"amount of",
"tissue",
"III",
"112 FUNDAMENTAL TECHNIQUES OF PLASTIC SURGERY",
"RADIAL FOREARM FLAP",
"This flap, raised on the flexor aspect of the fore- arm, is perfused from the radial vessels. Their perforating branches supply the plexus of the investing layer of deep fascia, from which the blood is distributed to the overlying skin. The flap can be designed as a fasciocutaneous flap to transfer soft tissue alone, or in combination with a vascularised length of radial bone as an osteo- fasciocutaneous flap, and also transferring the fascia alone.",
"In the proximal part of the forearm, the radial vessels lie between the muscle bellies of brachioradialis and flexor carpi radialis, and their perforating branches reach the investing layer of fascia by passing along the intermuscu- lar septum between the two muscles (Fig. 4.9). The tendons of the two muscles separate distal- ly, and the vessels become more superficial, lying on flexor pollicis longus and pronator quadratus. The effect is to make the septum a less well-defined structure, but the concept of perforating branches from the vessels reaching the fascial layer remains valid.",
"In the part of the forearm between the sites of insertion of pronator teres and brachio- radialis the intermuscular septum, with its content of branches of the radial vessels, continues laterally over flexor pollicis longus the radius. towards the lateral surface of There the bone, over a length of approxim- ately 10 em, has a 'bare' area covered only by periosteum, with which the septum merges, its content of branches of the radial vessels surface, forming a plexus on its and supplying the underlying bone. Branches of the radial vessels also supply both the flexor pollicis longus and pronator quadratus muscles in addition to the flexor aspect of the radius from which they take origin, adjoining the 'bare' area.",
"The vessels passing superficially from the radial artery to reach the investing layer of fascia provide the perfusion source for the fascio- cutaneous element of the flap; the vessels which continue laterally and deeply provide the vascular basis for the transfer of the segment of radius.",
"The fasciocutaneous element is generally constructed as an island and experience has shown that, provided there is an adequate breadth of the investing layer of tile deep fascia connecting the island to the intermuscular septum with its content of perforators and hence to tile radial vessels, it need not directly overlie the line of the vessels. The geometry of the transfer largely governs its site. A distal site allows a long proximal vascular pedicle, useful when the transfer is as a free flap; a proximal site allows a long distal pedicle, valuable when a pedicled transfer to the hand is planned. When the transfer is pedicled, the radial vessels pro- vide the sole perfusion source; when a free flap is used, an additional superficial vein is gener- ally retained, available for anastomosis should the need arise.",
"The flap is raised under tourniquet. Its out- line, and the line of the radial vessels and a suitably sized superficial vein, generally the cephalic, are drawn out on the skin prior to exsanguination of the arm and inflation of the tourniquet.",
"Fasciocutaneous flap (Fig. 4.53) The plane of elevation lies between the investing layer of fascia and the muscles, and the key to the dissection lies in identifying the inter- muscular brachioradialis and flexor carpi radialis. With these muscles and their tendons identified the septum is approached first from one side and then from the other, retracting the related structures to expose the radial vessels. The vessels are mobilised along with the flap and the intermuscular septum, dividing the multiple small branches to the surrounding muscles. Care should be taken to avoid damage to the terminal branch of the radial nerve which is a close lateral relation of the radial artery in the middle third of the forearm.",
"septum between",
"Additional skin incisions are made, proxi- mally or distally as required, to allow further mobilisation of the vessels in creating the pedi- cle, and dissection free of the superficial vein. On the arterial side, the proximal limit is the origin of the anterior interosseous artery, which should be retained as a perfusion source for the distal",
"FLAPS",
"Fasciocutaneous",
"Osteofasciocutaneous",
"Fig. 4.53 The vascular basis of the radial forearm flap raised as a fasciocutaneous flap.free or pedicled, and as an osteofasciocutaneous flap,incorporating part of the thickness of the radius.",
"forearm and hand; on the venous side, the proxi- mal limit is the antecubital venous plexus.",
"Osteofasciocutaneous flap (Fig. 4.53) The skin island is raised as already described as far as the mobilisation of flexor carpi radialis and brachioradialis from the intermuscular septum. Retraction of the flap medially, and brachioradi- alis laterally, exposes flexor pollicis longus and pronator quadratus, and the vessels entering them. An arbitrary line is drawn over the two muscles in the long axis of the radius between the insertions of pronator teres and brachioradi- alis, a length of approximately 10 em, the line",
"along which the muscles and the underlying bone will be sectioned. Medial to this line the vessels entering the muscles are divided as the flap is mobilised, but the vessels entering the muscles lateral to the line and reaching the 'bare' area are carefully preserved.",
"The line is selected so that the radial shaft is divided in a ratio of one-third lateral and the lateral element pro- two-thirds medial, viding the bony component of the composite transfer. Along the line, the muscles are incised down to the underlying bone and the bone is sectioned using a power saw with a fine blade.",
"1/3",
"114 FUNDAMENTAL TECHNIQUES OF PlASTIC SURGERY",
"The segment of bone has also taken the form of a wedge, cut from the flexor surface of the bone or its lateral surface. All three forms of resection appear to result in a vascularised segment, as long as the muscles, and the periosteum covering the bare area, are maintained.",
"Removal of a rectangle of bone leaves a point of weakness at each end of the site of the resec- tion, and this can be reduced if an additional tri- angle of bone is removed so that the sharp edge at each extremity of the defect is rounded off. Even so, a protective plaster of Paris is advisable for 4-6 weeks postoperatively while the radius remodels.",
"Fascial flap Vascularised transfer of the investing layer of deep fascia on its own has also been carried out in the form of a segment separated from the overlying superficial fascia and skin. It provides a vascularised sheet to reconstruct defects of the hand which has the virtues of thinness, and an ability to drape over an irregular surface, able to convert the defect into one capable of accepting a free skin graft.",
"Management of the secondary defect The skin defect is split skin grafted. The defect almost invariably includes a considerable area of the visceral paratenon covering the tendon of flexor carpi radialis, and concentration on the raising of the flap is liable to divert the attention of the surgeon from the defect, allowing the paratenon to dry out. It must be kept constantly moist. Adequate graft take and satisfactory hand function are of para- mount importance, and are achieved best by immobilisation in plaster of Paris. The hand should be immobilised in the position of func- tion with the wrist fully extended. This should be maintained for 14-21 days to ensure firm attachment of the graft before movements are allowed.",
"Fortunately, even if the graft fails, and an area of bare tendon is exposed, a final deficit in hand function is not inevitable. With a conservative regime of patience and bland dressings, making sure that a full range of finger and wrist move- ments is maintained throughout, the exposed",
"tendon will be found to granulate slowly and heal spontaneously.",
"Clinical usage Among free flaps, the radial forearm has an excellent safety record. It is technically easy to raise, and its popularity has added to this the virtue of familiarity. The skin which it provides is thin and pliable, capable of moulding to an irregular surface. Used as a fasciocutaneous flap, its only adverse factor of significance concerns the secondary defect, its appearance, and the potential for graft failure. Now that the reason for graft failure is understood and can be coun- tered by maintaining an immobilised wrist until the graft is firmly attached, this is no longer an adverse factor. Used as a composite with bone, the perfusion sources spread along its length allow it to be osteotomised if necessary and, used to reconstruct mandible, this is an advant- age. The cross-sectional area available, however, is not great and it cannot withstand major stress. As a consequence, it is not suitable for sub- sequent insertion of osseo-integrated implants.",
"ULNAR FOREARM FLAP",
"The perforating system of the ulnar forearm flap passes from the ulnar vessels to the investing layer of fascia in the septum between flexor carpi ulnaris digitorum superficialis (Fig. 4.9). The flap is generally sited towards the ulnar side of the forearm, but in other respects the techniques involved in its transfer are similar to those of the radial forearm flap in its fasciocutan- eous form. The two flaps have a largely similar range of potential usage, but the radial form is more often used in clinical practice.",
"and flexor",
"LATERAL UPPER ARM FLAP",
"This fasciocutaneous flap (Fig. 4.54) is raised on the lateral aspect of the upper arm, just above the lateral epicondyle of the humerus, using as its vascular basis the posterior branch of the radial collateral artery and its venae comitantes. It can also be transferred as an osteofasciocutaneous",
"FLAPS",
"Fig.4.54 The vascular basis of the lateral upper arm flap.the posterior terminal branch of the profunda brachii artery.",
"flap by including a segment of the underlying humeral shaft.",
"The parent vessel of the perfusion system is the profunda brachii artery. This vessel runs alongside the radial nerve, deep to triceps, in the spiral groove, and reaches the lateral intermus- cular septum between triceps and the insertion of deltoid. There it divides into two branches, anterior and posterior. The anterior branch, small and not always present, accompanies the radial nerve as it passes distally in the groove between brachialis and brachioradialis. The posterior branch, with an external diameter of 1.5-2 mm, is consistently present, with associated venae comitantes, running distally in the intermuscular septum between triceps and the brachialis-brachioradialis muscle group. In the intermuscular septum it gives off branches which reach the investing layer of deep fascia and the overlying skin. Additional multiple small vessels pass from it into the surrounding muscles, and also reach the humeral periosteum to which the intermuscular septum is attached.",
"aviable for suture in the recipient area if a sensate flap is desired. Division of the nerve, and of the posterior cutaneous nerve of the fore- arm which arises in common with it, leaves an anaesthetic area distal to the flap site.",
"Raising the flap The flap, designed astride the intermuscular septum, is raised under tourniquet. Its breadth is limited to 6cm because of the need to close the average length is 10 em. As a first step, the line joining the lateral epicondyle and the deltoid insertion, representing the line of the intermuscular is marked out on the skin. Behind septum, this line the flap contains no structures of note, and this makes it convenient to raise this seg- ment first, and establish the plane between the investing layer of fascia and triceps at the outset, dissecting forward until the lateral intermuscular septum is reached. The muscle fibres can then be separated from the septum over its full depth and over the length of the flap, exposing the vessels and the nerves in the septum.",
"secondary defect directly;",
"its",
"The lower lateral cutaneous nerve of the arm supplies sensation to the skin area and is",
"115",
"116 FUNDAMENTAL TECHNIQUES OF PLASTIC SURGERY",
"The skin incision is extended proximally to just behind the posterior border of deltoid, and this allows the vessels and nerves to be dissected out proximally, separated from the radial nerve, and traced back into the spiral groove. In carry- ing out this dissection triceps and deltoid are separated, and any fibres of triceps attached to the septum which are obscuring the groove are divided. With the vascular pedicle defined, the flap anterior to the septum can be freed from brachialis and brachioradialis, and its elevation completed. Throughout the dissection numerous small branches of the perfusing vessels supply- ing the surrounding muscles have to be divided. When the transfer is as an osteofasciocutan- eous flap, a strip of muscle is left attached to each side of the septum. These strips, carried down to the bone over the length to be raised, provide protection for the vessels in the septum which are perfusing the two elements of the composite transfer, skin and bone. As a prelimin- ary to this part of the dissection the radial nerve should be retracted out of the way. A 1em broad, and up to IDem long, strip of the humeral shaft can be raised without compromising the strength of the bone.",
"Clinical usage The skin element is thin and the underlying layer of fat is generally thin, the combination making for a flexible flap. The scar which represents the sec- ondary defect, though in a site which may regularly be exposed, is not unduly obtrusive. The small- ness of the diameters of its perfusing vessels is its major drawback, the trend generally being towards flaps with larger perfusing vessel diameters.",
"SCAPULAR FLAPS",
"These flaps (Fig. 4.55) are perfused by branches of the circumflex scapular artery and its associ- ated veins. The artery is formed by division of its parent vessel, the subscapular, itself a branch of the axillary artery. The subscapular artery passes down on the posterior wall of the axilla for approximately 4cm, where it divides into the thoracodorsal artery which continues down to reach the latissimus dorsi muscle, and the",
"Fig. 4.55 Scapular flaps, showing the cutaneous branches of the circumflex scapular vessels as the vascular basis of the two flaps, one running horizontally towards the midline. and the other run- ning along the line of the lateral border of the scapula. If a longer vascular pedicle is required. the circumflex scapular vessels may be traced back to the parent subscapular vessels in the axilla.",
"circumflex scapular artery, the latter the larger branch of the two.",
"Almost immediately the artery passes into the triangular intermuscular space. This space is bounded above by subscapularis and teres minor, below by teres major, laterally by the long head of triceps, and the artery, while curving round the lateral border of the scapula inside the space, gives off musculoskeletal branches. Emerging from between teres major and minor into the subcutaneous tissues overlying the scapula, it divides into a horizontal branch which runs towards the midline approximately 2 em below the spine of the scapula, and a des- cending branch which runs obliquely down- wards, parallel to the lateral border of the scapula. These terminal cutaneous branches have each been used as the basis of a fasciocutaneous free flap, one the horizontal flap, the other the parascapular flap.",
"The main musculoskeletal branch of the circumflex scapular artery is given off in the trian- gular space, and passes deep to infraspinatus into the infraspinous fossa. Before doing so, it gives off a branch which runs down parallel to the lateral border of the scapula as far as its inferior angle, where it anastomoses with the deep branch of the transverse cervical artery. In its course it gives off a series of small branches which provide a periosteal supply to the scapula along its lateral border, through its muscle attachments. These provide the perfusion source which allows a strip of the lateral border of the scapula to be trans- ferred, usually as a vascularised composite along with one of the fasciocutaneous flaps.",
"The horizontal flap is designed approximately midway between the spine of the scapula and its inferior angle; the parascapular flap runs parallel to the lateral border of the scapula, both as ellipses. The two flaps share a common centre, the site where the cutaneous branch of the parent artery emerges from the intermuscular space, between the teres muscles. Identification of the space provides the point from which the central line of the ellipse is drawn on the skin, parallel to the spine of the scapula in the case of the horizon- tal flap, parallel to its lateral border in the case of the parascapular flap. The width of each flap is limited in practice by the need to be able to close the secondary defect directly, 24cm x 12cm being considered an absolute maximum.",
"Raising the flap Both flaps are raised from their distant ends towards the point of entry of the vessels, the plane of elevation baring the underlying muscles to ensure that the flaps contain their axial ves- sels. As the vascular pedicle is approached the vessels become visible on the deep surface of the flap. It is a short pedicle, but it can be lengthened if the vessels are traced back to their subscapular origin in the axilla. Extension of the dissection in this way increases the length of the pedicle and the calibre of the vessels, both making for ease in transfer as a free flap. The degree of technical dif- ficulty involved in the dissection is largely dependent on the amount of fat which sur- rounds the vessels, and in the obese patient this can be considerable.",
"FLAPS",
"When the transfer is as a fasciocutaneous flap, the musculoskeletal branches of the circumflex scapular vessels are divided to allow the vessels to be mobilised, but when the transfer includes bone these vessels have to be carefully pre- served. The segment of bone transferred, approximately 1.5 cm in width, is cut from the lateral border of the scapula from just below the origin of the long head of triceps, a length of up to 14cm. This part of the scapula is perfused through its muscle attachments, and these must be preserved intact when the bone is being cut.",
"Clinical usage The skin which both flaps transfer has the thick- ness and lack of flexibility typical of dorsal skin generally, and this may be a factor of importance when the method is being considered for use. The thickness of the subcutaneous fat is variable but can be substantial. The shortness of the pedi- cle and the small calibre of the vessels involved, unless extended to the origin of the circumflex scapular vessels, make for a degree of technical difficulty in the transfer, and the extension adds considerably to the difficulty of dissection. A fur- ther adverse factor is that both flaps involve turning the patient, unless the surgeon is willing to carry out the entire procedure, creation of the defect and elevation of the flap, in the lateral position, a position which for most surgeons lacks the virtue of familiarity. In its osteofasciocu- taneous version a serious question mark concer- ning its use relates to the considerable disruption of the musculature of the shoulder girdle which it leaves in the scapular area. The potential it cre- ates for frozen shoulder must be a major deter- rent to its use, particularly in the older patient.",
"VASCULARISED FIBULAR TRANSFER",
"The fibula derives its blood supply from branches of the anterior tibial and the peroneal vessels, but when it is transferred as a vascularised bone graft, the peroneal vessels are the sole perfusion source. The peroneal artery is described as a branch of the posterior tibial artery, arising just below the divi- sion of the popliteal into the anterior and posterior tibial branches, but different arterial patterns exist, and when a fibular transfer is being considered it",
"117",
"118 FUNDAMENTAL TECHNIQUES OF PLASTIC SURGERY",
"is essential to carry out preoperative arteriograms, anomalies and arteriosclerosis providing the two main contraindications to its use. The peroneal vessels run distally alongside the fibula, behind the interosseous membrane. In the upper half of the bone they are separated from the interosseous membrane by tibialis posterior, which there is tak- ing origin from it, but in its lower half they lie directly behind the membrane. They provide the nutrient artery which enters the fibula a little above its mid-point, and also have branches which reach the surface of the bone. Septocutan- eous perforators from the peroneal vessels also pass laterally behind the fibula in the intermuscu- lar septum between the peroneal muscles and soleus, and perfuse the overlying skin. These allow the fibula to be transferred as an osteocutaneous free flap, as well as a vascularised bone graft.",
"The length of bone which can be harvested extends from just below the head to above the lower tibiofibular joint, approximately 30 em, and its segmental pattern of blood supply allows osteotomy to be carried out. The perforating branches are capable of supporting a skin island up to lOcm x 20em.",
"Despite the loss of the shaft of the bone, the leg functions remarkably normally in the adult. In children and adolescents, where long bone growth is not complete, greater circumspection is required in its use, because of the risk of tibial bowing.",
"Raising the flap The procedure (Fig. 4.56) is carried out under tourniquet, and the line joining the head of the",
"Fig.4.56 Transfer of the fibula alone and with a skin flap.",
"When the bone alone is being transferred. it is approached between the peroneal and posterior muscle compartments. and the mobilisation of the muscles from it is carried out anteriorly around the shaft of the bone. In the lower part of the dissection (8), the peroneal vessels lie directly behind the septum in direct contact with the bone. compared with the upper part of the dissection (A). where tibialis posterior. taking origin from the interosseous septum. separates it from the peroneal vessels.",
"When a composite of skin and bone is being transferred (C). the skin flap is positioned symmetrically over the line of the septum between soleus and peroneus longus and elevated from both sides of it.The perforating vessels which pass to the surface from the peroneal vessels to perfuse it may emerge from the muscles. most often soleus. adjoining the septum. and they must be watched for so that. if necessary. some muscle can be included in the pedicle. This apart, the procedure is carried out as for the bone alone.",
"A",
"B",
"c",
"Flexor hallucis longus",
"fibula and the lateral malleolus is marked out on the skin.",
"When the transfer is of bone alone, a proximodis- tal skin incision is made along the fibular skin marking, over a length to match that of the bone to be harvested, and the skin flaps are raised on each side to allow the septum which separates the posterior and peroneal muscle compartments to be identified. As a first step, the common peroneal nerve is identified, and care is taken to protect it. It represents the proximal limit of har- vesting the bone, the ankle joint being the distal limit. The muscles on each side of the septum are separated from one another, and the lateral sur- face of the fibula reached.",
"When a skin island is being transferred with the bone as a composite, it is outlined on the skin as an oval placed symmetrically over the septum between soleus and peroneus longus, centred over the middle or the middle and lower third of the fibula. The skin incision is made, and extended proximally and distally as necessary, and the flap is elevated from its anterior and posterior borders, deep to the investing layer of fascia, as far as the intermuscular septum. The septum contains perforating vessels, branches of the per- oneal vessels, which provide the perfusion source for the skin island, but some of the vessels pass into the muscles on each side, and emerge from them near the septum. These should be looked for when the flap is being raised, and a cuff of muscle may have to be elevated with the flap to ensure that they are included in the pedi- cle. In the initial muscle dissection, separating them from the intermuscular septum, the perfo- rating vessels have to be seen and preserved.",
"With the muscles on each side of the septum separated, the dissection proceeds in the same manner with both types of transfer. In mobilising the muscles scalpel dissection is used, the plane being extraperiosteal. The proximal and distal extent of the mobilisation depends on the length of fibula which is being transferred, but over that length they are mobilised completely.",
"Mobilisation is begun in the direction of the anterior surface of the bone, with division of the from septum which separates the peroneal the extensor compartment, and mobilisation of the extensor muscles, taking care to avoid",
"FLAPS",
"damage to the anterior tibial vessels. Completion of the mobilisation of the extensors exposes the interosseous membrane from in front.",
"At this point, the fibula is sectioned proximally and distally at the levels required by the recon- struction, and the interosseous membrane is divided to expose the peroneal vessels which lie behind it. Section of the bone and division of the membrane, carried out in this order, allows trac- tion to be applied to the membrane while it is being divided, and reduces the risk of injury to the peroneal vessels, in particular the venae comitantes, which are thin walled and easily damaged. It also allows traction to be applied to the bone, once the membrane has been divided, more effectively displaying the structures involved, and making dissection easier and safer. Division of the interosseous membrane is best begun distally where the peroneal vessels lie directly behind the septum, and can be immedi- ately identified, mobilised, and distally ligated. The vessels are traced upwards under direct vision, mobilising them and dividing branches directed away from the fibula, making sure at the same time that their attachments to the fibula are preserved. Proximally, where tibialis posterior is taking origin from the fibula, the vessels run between it and flexor hallucis longus, sometimes through the substance of the latter, from which they then have to be mobilised. Dissection and clearance of the vessels is continued up to their point of origin from the parent posterior tibial vessels, any residual muscle attachments being divided, and leaving the proximal vascular pedicle as the sale attachment.",
"The length of pedicle which is available for anastomosis is often less than ideal and, particu- larly when the transfer is as an osteocutaneous lies in an awkward position. As a con- flap, sequence vein grafts may be required. When the transfer is osteocutaneous, osteotomies can only be carried out with safety on the anterior or anterolateral aspect of the bone. Transferred purely as bone, any of the surfaces can be used, other than the one from which the branches of the peroneal vessels are entering.",
"When bone alone has been transferred, skin suture with suction drainage is sufficient. When the flap is osteocutaneous the secondary defect is",
"119",
"110 FUNDAMENTAL TECHNIQUES OF PLASTIC SURGERY",
"split skin grafted, preferably delayed. A splint is used for several weeks to support the lower leg and foot, and prevent the development of an equi- nus deformity, until the muscles heal and function normally. An ultimately normal gait is the rule.",
"Clinical usage This transfer can be made either as one of bone alone, or as a composite with a flap of skin, its",
"dimensions up to ZDcm x IDem. The characteris- tics of the bone, which determine its clinical role, are the length available, up to 30 em, and its strength. Initially the bone is not strong enough to bear the body weight, but it can undergo hypertrophy to the extent of weightbearing successfully. It can safely be osteotomised, and should be able to accept osseo-integrated implants.",
"Additional techniques",
"5",
"Several techniques have been developed which do not fit readily into a neat classification, either because they are not strictly surgical, though they are used in a surgical context, or have been taken from other surgical disciplines because they offered a partial or complete solution to problems whose management by conventional plastic surgical methods was unsatisfactory.",
"TISSUE EXPANSION",
"fine bore tube. The effect of the inflation is to produce an increasing bulge of the overlying tissue, and in so doing stretch the skin. In this way the skin is 'expanded', increased in area, and made available for reconstruction.",
"Expansion is exploited clinically in two ways. In one, as used in postmastectomy breast recon- struction, the expanded skin and the underlying cavity are both utilised: the cavity for permanent insertion of a silicone implant to recreate the breast mound, the expanded skin to provide an envelope for the implant.",
"In this technique, a silastic 'bag', not unlike an uninflated balloon, is placed under the skin and superficial fascia, and inflated at intervals by the injection of saline under pressure (Fig. 5.1). The saline is not injected directly into the 'bag', but into a small non-expansile reservoir placed at a distance from it, and connected to it by a",
".The other way in which the principle is used is in the creation of an area of skin availability which, sited alongside a defect, allows it to be closed directly. The expanded area may be created beforehand, so that, when the defect is created, the expanded skin is already available to close it. Alternatively, it may be used to replace a skin graft, previously applied to cover the defect. The skin adjoining a defect is generally re- cognised to give the best result in reconstructing it, because they have similar characteristics, and this is a major virtue of the method, one which shows most strikingly when it is used to extend hair-bearing scalp in replacing an area of alopecia.",
"..\"",
"'\".: ....",
".... -';",
".:.: ...",
"Fig. 5.1 The principle of tissue expansion. The 'expander', in an unexpanded state, is inserted in the area to be expanded, with the reservoir positioned at a distance from it. Saline is injected under pressure into the reservoir at intervals, causing the 'expander' to increase in volume, stretching and 'expanding' the overlying skin.",
"Various shapes of expanders are used - round, oval and crescentic - with different sizes, depending on the amount of expansion desired. A skin incision is made, just long enough to allow the expander to be inserted without bending, and the pocket to accommodate it is the deep level of the dissected, generally at superficial fascia. A pocket is also made for the reservoir at a distance from the expander.",
"12/",
"122 FUNDAMENTAL TECHNIQUES OF PlASTIC SURGERY",
"The reservoir is sometimes positioned externally, making injection easier as well as painless, though it probably increases the risk of infection reaching the expander. A small volume of saline is injected immediately to smooth out the the incisions are envelope of the expander, closed, and the wounds left for 1-2 weeks to heal. Expansion is then begun, and repeated usually at weekly intervals. Whitening of the skin, indicative of local ischaemia, or a complaint of pain by the patient, are signs that expansion has gone far enough for the time being. Over the period of the expansion, a degree of capsule formation usually builds up and, depending on its severity, it is left, scored or excised.",
"The technique has its strong advocates, but overall it has not achieved the popularity which seemed likely when it was first introduced. Adverse factors concern the time taken to achieve adequate expansion, 6-12 weeks, and the increasingly bizarre appearance of the patient as expansion proceeds. Even when circumstances are ideal, the complication rate is considerable, mainly the result of infection, haematoma or extrusion, and the nature of the technique means that any complication requires removal of the expander and spells failure of the method. The other substantial problem is that of designing the expansion, which involves three dimensions, to provide cover for a defect which, the breast and scalp apart, is usually two-dimensional.",
"The most effective applications of the method have been where the surface is convex with a bony base, as in the scalp and forehead, and in breast reconstruction.",
"LIPOSUCTION",
"Liposuction is a technique which permits 'blind' removal of subcutaneous fat through a small skin incision. Its most frequent clinical role is a in the removal of unwanted cosmetic one, subcutaneous fat as an element in 'body sculp- turing', but it also has a small place in routine plastic surgical practice, in removing large lipomas and defatting unduly bulky skin flaps to make them conform to the surrounding contour after completion of their transfer.",
"It allows a large area to be defatted through a small skin incision, reducing scarring and simplifying postoperative care. Depending on whether the procedure is being carried out under local or general anaesthesia, the fat to be aspir- ated is infiltrated with a local anaesthetic agent or saline, containing adrenaline in low concen- tration. This facilitates aspiration and helps in achieving haemostasis.",
"A small skin incision is made, and the suction cannula is inserted into the subcutaneous layer in the area to be aspirated and attached to a high-pressure suction pump. It is then moved to and fro like a piston, directed radially from the site of insertion through an arc. The cannula is blunt ended, and in its to and fro movements it disrupts the fat, which is sucked out into the suction pump reservoir, the blood vessels traversing the area largely escaping damage. It is important the suction should not be applied, either superficially as far as the deep surface of the dermis which results in a lumpy skin surface, or deeply as far as the deep fascial layer which creates an area of adhesion of the skin. With suction completed, a pressure dressing is applied to the site. Local bruising can be considerable, but infective complications are infrequent.",
"that",
"Lipomas with little or no fibrous tissue are readily treated by this technique, but those with a more extensive fibrous stroma are difficult to remove, and may require formal excision. The flaps which benefit from debulking tend to be from the groin or hypogastrium, and although it is suggested that fat does not reaccumulate after removal, flaps from those sites are notorious for redeveloping subcutaneous fat if the patient puts on weight. When this occurs, the procedure may have to be repeated.",
"LASERS",
"In treating the port wine stain type of haemangioma, the use of cover by cosmetics, and surgical removal, have been the unavoidable mainstays despite their manifest inadequacy, but the development of laser technology has now added a third therapeutic possibility. Two main",
"types of laser are currently used, argon and tuneable dye lasers.",
"Both instruments work on the principle that energy emitted by the laser is absorbed by the oxyhaemoglobin in erythrocytes within the ectatic vessels of the haemangioma. Diffusion of this energy damages the endothelial cells of the vessels and they undergo fibrosis. Circulation through the vessels ceases, and the port wine appearance is lost. With both types of laser, the end result of treatment is largely the same, but they reach it in different ways.",
"The argon laser emits blue-green light, with most of the energy at 488 and 514 nm. Using a 1mm laser beam spot, the dermis is penetrated to a depth of 0.75-1 mm. The energy of each pulse, though it is applied in very short pulses of 200 us, tends to be dissipated beyond the blood vessels into surrounding tissues, giving rise on occasion to a degree of scarring. Focal alopecia can also occur. The area of staining is treated in such a way as to produce a confluent patch, but up to 2 months have to be allowed so that the tissues can recover before treatment of a skin area adjacent to a previously treated site can be carried out.",
"The tuneable dye laser uses a rhodamine 585 nm. dye Oxyhaemoglobin has an absorption peak at 577 nm, and the nearness of the two gives it the advantage over the argon laser of increased specificity, and penetration of the dermis to a greater depth, 1-1.5mm. As a result, the risk of scarring is low. In contrast to the argon laser, non- contiguous areas are treated with a 5 mm laser spot. This initially produces a purpuric patch of skin, which reverts to a normal skin colour within a fortnight. Successive treatments are aimed at intervening residual areas of staining.",
"source,",
"and emits",
"light",
"at",
"Regardless of which laser is used, multiple treatments are required at intervals of roughly",
"ADDITIONAL TECHNIQUES 123",
"2 months to allow the tissues to recover. The comparative merits of the two types of laser are difficult to quantify. Clinical experience suggests that the argon laser produces better results in dark port wine stains, while the tuneable dye laser is more effective in treating paler lesions, particularly in children.",
"In the older patient, the haemangioma tends to extend superficially, and in depth. Superficial extension has the effect of creating increasing irregularity of its surface; extension deeply usually brings the lesion beyond the limit of penetration, and as a result it does not respond well to laser therapy.",
"'Amateur' tattoos, produced with Indian ink, have been found to respond well to treatment using the Q-switched ruby laser. Some, though not invariable, success has also been achieved in treatment of traumatic tattooing. With 3 J at 694 nm delivered in a 30 ms pulse, with a spot size of 5 mm, the effect is confined to the carbon pigment, which is converted to colourless oxides. Carried out under local anaesthesia, the added adrenaline has vasoconstriction of the effect of minimising any interaction between the blood and the laser beam. Improvement has also been found to occur in dark professional tattoos. The carbon component is removed, but unexpectedly significant fading of the red and green pigment has also occurred. This is felt to be the result of enhanced phagocytic activity, induced as part of the effect on the carbon component of the tattoo.",
"Laser technology is a rapidly expanding and developing field in medical physics. Protagonists claim considerable improvement in problem areas such as removal of hair (following flap transfer) and resolution of hypertrophic scars. These treatments remain to be proved in clinical practice and have not, as yet, been adopted widely.",
"Hypertrophic scars and keloids",
"6",
"When a scar, instead of becoming soft and pale in the usual manner, becomes red and thickened it is described as being either a hypertrophic scar or a keloid. These terms tend to be used rather indiscriminately, probably because it is difficult to define each with certainty.",
"The hypertrophic scar is raised above the level of the surrounding skin, rather red initially, but does not encroach on the surrounding normal skin, and shows an eventual tendency to regress spontaneously. The keloid is a much more florid lesion, grossly elevated, tending to spread and involve the surrounding normal skin. Itching of the involved area is common, severity matching the degree of activity, sometimes with hyperaesthesia and tenderness to touch. The tendency to spontaneous regression is much less in evidence.",
"its",
"These are the extremes and as such easily recognised, but in reality there is a gradation from the completely quiescent scar through the very mildly hypertrophic scar to the most severe of keloids, and the point at which a hypertrophic scar becomes a keloid is a matter of opinion. The gradation rather suggests that the arbitrary division into keloid and hypertrophic scar is artificial and that the conditions are really a single entity of varying severity. The name is fortunately of subsidiary importance, for the treatment of both conditions is similar. Virtually nothing is known of the cause.",
"The clinical picture A precise picture of the condition is difficult to draw, not necessarily apply to the individual case and the",
"for",
"clinical generalisations do",
"is extremely variable and condition itself unpredictable. In the description which follows, the term keloid will be used to cover both conditions.",
"The tendency to develop keloids appears to diminish with age, but it is not possible in practice to forecast whether any particular patient will develop one. Nevertheless, any is more incision in a known 'keloid former' likely to develop into a keloid than a similar incision in a random patient, and recurrence following simple excision of a keloid is highly probable. Keloids are much more common in the black than in the Asian patient, and more common in the Asian than in the white. The black patient also exhibits the condition in its most active form and the 'tumours' can on occasion reach quite grotesque proportions. In the white patient, on the other hand, even the frank keloid does eventually become less active, and takes on the characteristics and activity rather of a hypertrophic scar (Fig. 6.1).",
"Certain areas of the body have a particular tendency to produce keloids (Fig. 6.2); the presternal area is probably the most prone of all and here oddly enough the shape of the keloid often shows a sex difference - in the male it tends to be irregular in outline, in the female the pull of the breasts commonly gives it a butterfly outline. The deltoid area is another notorious site, most often following BCG innoculation. The earlobe is the third common site, usually after ear piercing. A scar may become keloid in only part of its length, a feature which shows particularly in the neck where the vertical scar is prone to keloid change while the horizontal scar is rarely",
"127",
"128 FUNDAMENTAL TECHNIQUES OF PLASTIC SURGERY",
"Fig. 6.1 Change from keloid to hypertrophic scarring over a per-iod of 2 years. The area of most severe keloid was excised and grafted, but the settling of the areas left untouched is still clearcut,",
"affected. the neck is excised incorporating Z-plasties it is not uncommon for the horizontal scars to be completely flat and soft, while the vertical limbs of the Zs show keloid or at very least hypertrophic change. In general, scars in lines of election show less tendency to keloid than those which cross them.",
"If a scar of",
"Management If a keloid is surgically excised, the probability that the resulting scar will develop into a fresh keloid is extremely high, and the more florid the keloid the greater the probability. For this reason surgery of keloids is generally to be avoided (Fig. 6.3). However, when the scar is hypertrophic rather than keloid and is bridging a flexure, so that contracture appears to have been a factor in its initiation, correction of the contractural element as part of the excisional treatment seems often to reduce markedly the likelihood of recurrence.",
"The first line of treatment in the circumscribed keloid is injection of the highly active steroid, dramatically triamcinolone. This successful with obvious flattening and softening apparent in a matter of days.",
"can",
"be",
"Nevertheless, it must be remembered always that triamcinolone is itself an extremely potent drug whose action is not fully understood. Caution in its use is essential. It must be injected into the substance of the keloid, and enough injected to make the whole keloid blanch. Injection can be repeated weekly. When the keloid has become flat with the surrounding skin, treatment should stop. Further injections will produce local skin and fat, atrophy. Remarkably enough the drug is effective regard- less of whether the keloid is red and 'fresh' or white and 'mature'.",
"A recent additional form of treatment has come in the form of silicone gel. The gel is applied to the affected area and held in position by tape, The mode of action is unclear and the rate at which the activity of the keloid subsides varies. The method has the virtue of being non- invasive, which is particularly useful in children, and of having no side-effects. Although not effective in every case, experience has been that scars which fail to improve with silicone gel tend not to respond to injection of triamcinolone either.",
"The rate of change in the keloid appears to depend on the length of time for which the gel is applied. Ideally it should be worn at all times other than when washing or bathing.",
"justified in treatment may be managing small, troublesome keloids, especially those arising in the earlobes. This site is almost impossible to treat with other than steroid injections - even when successful, this can leave an unsightly, pendulous remnant behind. Under these circumstances, excision followed by a small dose of radiation may be effective in removing the keloid and preventing recurrence. technique is by no means Although this successful risk of recurrence is one which many patients are prepared to accept.",
"Surgical",
"in every instance,",
"the",
"In clinical practice, the major problems arise when the condition complicates burns and degloving injuries, the extent of the keloid change precluding the use of steroids and silicone gel. Quite apart from the appearance of the scarring and the contractural problems so frequently associated with it, the severity of the",
"HYPERTROPHIC SCARS AND KELOIDS",
"Fig. 6.2 A Mildly hypertrophic scar of the deltoid area. B Severe post-burn hypertrophic scarring of the neck and chin. e Hypertrophic scarring of the neck following the use of a vertical incision to excise a thyroglossal fistula. o A presternal keloid in the male. E A presternal keloid in the female black patient, showing the characteristic 'butterfly' outline. (Courtesy of Mr.Michael F. Green) F A severe keloid of the scapular region.",
"Examples of hypertrophic scars and keloids",
"129",
"110 FUNDAMENTAL TECHNIQUES OF PlASTIC SURGERY",
"Fig. 6.3 Marginal recurrence of a keloid after excision and grafting.",
"itch which usually accompanies it causes the patient to scratch the area, often to the extent of producing excoriation and exacerbating the problem generally. It is in this situation that the application of sustained pressure has had a dramatic effect both in mitigating the itch and in causing the condition to regress, with flattening and softening of the previously raised, indurated areas. The mode of action is not known, but its effectiveness has resulted in the development of garments custom-fitted to the individual patient, so that constant uniform pressure is applied to the areas involved. These garments are worn continuously until resolution is largely complete, which this may take a year and more.",
"Radiation injury",
"7",
"The forms of radiation injury in which the plastic surgeon becomes involved are radiodermatitis and radionecrosis (Fig. 7.1), and the aspects which concern him are the ischaemia of the irradiated",
"tissues and the association of radiation damage with neoplasia. Avascularity is stated to increase in severity up to 6 months postirradiation, that both plateauing thereafter, but",
"the fact",
"Fig. 7.1 Examples of radionecrosis and radiodermatitis. A Radionecrosis of the chin, floor of mouth and mandible, with a salivary fistula, following irradiation of a squamous carcinoma of the",
"anterior floor of mouth.",
"B Radionecrosis of the chest wall following radiotherapy used after radical mastectomy for carcinoma. showing central deep ulceration",
"with exposure of ribs, and associated surrounding radiodermatitis.",
"C,D Radiodermatitis following radiotherapy for acne vulgaris. Over a period of years since this record was made, the patient has had",
"excisions of multiple skin tumours, both basal cell and squamous cell carcinomas.",
"131",
"132 FUNDAMENTAL TECHNIQUES OF PlASnC SURGERY",
"conditions manifest themselves clinically very much later than this would suggest that the ischaemic process may progress for a much longer period.",
"Radiodermatitis is most often seen today in the facial skin and scalp, and in skin sites which were used as portals in the process of irradiating deep structures, intra-abdominal such as tumours, thyroid tumours, or regional lymph nodes, usually in the neck. Radiotherapy was also at one time a standard method of treating such facial conditions as acne, sycosis barbae, or lupus vulgaris, and ringworm of the scalp. Although it may no longer be used in this way, patients are still seen with the problems which have resulted from its use. The type of radiation used did not penetrate deeply, and it is unusual to find the deeper tissues significantly involved. As a result, the excision required in treating an area of radiodermatitis does not often need to be carried deeply much beyond the skin and der- mis. When there is doubt about how deeply the condition extends, the degree of mobility of the skin is a good guide, mobility indicating absence of deep involvement. The vascularity of the base left when the area of radiodermatitis has been excised will also give a good guide to the form that reconstruction should take, graft or flap. A free skin graft can generally be expected to take well, provided excision has been carried out to clinically tissue, though the defect following excision of radiodermatitis of the scalp treated 40-50 years ago for ringworm is not usually successfully managed using a split skin graft.",
"normal well-vascularised",
"left",
"Where the site has been used as a portal the situation is quite different. The entire block of tissue between the skin and the target site is involved. This form of radiodermatitis has much in common with radionecrosis, and in time frequently progresses to it.",
"skin implies ulceration and is indicative of much more deeply extending ischaemia. In managing such an ulcer the first need is to establish whether or not the ulcer has a neoplastic com- ponent. Biopsy should be used as routine, and it should be both generous and representative. A diagnosis of radionecrosis made in the absence",
"Radionecrosis which involves",
"the",
"of pathological confirmation should not be accepted.",
"The surgical problems set by radionecrosis can be of considerable magnitude, both from the point of view of resection and of reconstruction. The tissues involved are woody hard, and when essential structures such as major vessels and nerves lie in the involved field the technical diffi- culties do not require stressing. Ideally the entire area of involvement should be excised both mar- ginally and in depth as a preliminary to recon- struction, but this may not always be practicable, particularly in terms of depth clearance, because structures. of Reconstruction of such a defect virtually always requires a flap with the blood supply which it brings with it. If it has not been possible to resect the radionecrotic area in its entirety, the pedicle of the flap used to reconstruct the defect, with its content of blood vessels, is best left undivided indefinitely. Division of the pedicle in such cir- cumstances, even after a very prolonged period of time, is liable to be followed by necrosis of the flap, but if the zone of avascularity has been completely resected the problem does not arise. If a free flap has been used it is essential to use donor vessels outwith the area of radiation damage.",
"the",
"involvement",
"of",
"vital",
"The association with neoplasia takes two forms, the tumour either arising de no'1'O in the irradiated field, or occurring as continuing growth in a neoplasm treated by radiotherapy. The de novo tumour can appear as a late develop- ment in the tissues which were irradiated, even though the primary condition was neither malig- nant nor had malignant potential. The tumour can be a carcinoma or sarcoma, and often presents as an ulcer appearing in the area.",
"The extent of the resection required depends on the clinical problem for which the radio- therapy was used, and the type of radiation. Because of its effects on the local lymphatics, metastasis to the regional nodes is rare, and the local tumour tends to remain circumscribed both marginally and in depth, developing within the irradiated area. Unless the tumour has been grossly neglected, resection need be little more extensive than that required for the background of radiodermatitis or radionecrosis.",
"Tumour recurrence following radiotherapy presents either as failure to respond to the radia- tion, or as recurrence after apparent cure. It tends to be clinically atypical, frequently masquerad- ing as radionecrotic ulceration. Diagnosis is not made any easier when, as often happens, radionecrosis and recurrent tumour coexist in a single ulcer. As already emphasised, biopsy is",
"RADIATION INJURY 133",
"essential. Detailed consideration of how post- irradiation recurrent tumour should be managed is beyond the scope of this book, except to com- ment that the pattern of behaviour associated with the particular tumour tends to be lost, and the destruction of lymphatic channels by the radiation may result in bizarre metastatic patterns.",
"Pressure sore management",
"8",
"NON-PARAPLEGIC PRESSURE SORES",
"The usual sites of pressure sores in the non-para- plegic are the sacral area and heel, occasionally the iliac crest, and the background to their occur- rence is immobility of the patient. Although immobility is ultimately responsible for the local pressure being prolonged for sufficiently long to produce the local ischaemia which leads to the sores, other factors are usually present which predispose to their occurrence. Sores occur most often as a complication of an emaciating illness. Loss of subcutaneous fat reduces the cushion it provides and, coupled with the reluctance of the patient to move as a consequence of the lassitude typical of such an illness, combines to create the conditions for their occurrence. When a pressure sore arises in a relatively young patient, a neurological factor, such as multiple sclerosis, is virtually always present.",
"Management of such a sore depends on the sites involved, how extensive each sore is and, most of all, to what extent the progress of the debilitating illness can be halted and, hopefully, reversed. In this respect the most important assessment of the plastic surgeon is whether the sore is extending in extent or depth, is static, or is showing signs of healing with marginal epithelia lisation.",
"While the sore is extending the plastic sur- geon has no active role to play. The problem is essentially one of nursing and medical care. Once the sore has become static and, even more, shows signs of healing, the question becomes one of deciding whether meeting the conditions needed for successful reconstruction of the ulcer,",
"whether by graft or flap, might halt or even re- verse the improvement in the patient's medical state. A most important element in making the decision is to appreciate that the change from the bedridden to an ambulant state is likely to allow the healing process to progress, even though healing may be by marginal epithelialisation, and will be a slow process.",
"The patient at very least must be able to keep pressure off the site of the sore before active sur- gery can even be contemplated. This aspect of the problem has to be emphasised very strongly, and the need to observe it is paramount, even if it pre- cludes surgery in the majority of patients. If this is not strictly observed, it is virtually certain there will be a failure to achieve healing in the short term or to maintain healing in the long term.",
"In practice, the number of patients suitable for an aggressive surgical approach to the problem is very small. The solution lies more often in get- ting the patient ambulant. Ambulation immedi- ately relieves pressure on the typical ulcer sites, allowing spontaneous healing to begin. A strik- ing example of this is seen in the pressure sore of the heel, typically sited posteriorly over the tendo Achillis and the adjoining os calcis, which begins to heal as soon as the patient begins to walk and pressure is transferred to the normally weightbearing part of the heel. Certainly one should not rush into surgical treatment of such sores.",
"Management is most difficult when it is appar- ent that the patient is likely to be permanently bedridden. Considerable judgment is required in managing such a situation, and sympathy for the unfortunate patient must not be allowed to",
"135",
"136 FUNDAMENTAL TECHNIQUES OF PlASTIC SURGERY",
"override a realistic assessment of the problem. The decision is usually in the direction of saying that surgery is contraindicated.",
"The dilemma is seen in its most acute form in the patient, frequently young, who is suffering from multiple sclerosis, and who has developed a pressure sore. The harsh fact is that the devel- opment of a pressure sore is often the first step in the downward course of the patient with multi- ple sclerosis, and the question the surgeon must ask himself is whether his surgery will not have the effect of accelerating the downward course. Such a patient virtually always requires a flap to reconstruct the defect and the position which has to be maintained for a successful result all too often results in a fresh pressure sore elsewhere.",
"When a decision has been made that the defect should be treated surgically the choice lies between a graft and a flap and the selection depends on the character of the defect. The defect with little or no undermining is likely to be suitable for grafting; the defect with signifi- cant undermining is rarely suitable for grafting, and requires a flap. The flaps suitable for the various sites are largely similar to those used in the paraplegic patient.",
"The sore involving the heel is best left to heal spontaneously no matter how long it takes. The alternative reconstructions make demands on the patient which are not acceptable in the age group typically involved.",
"PARAPLEGIC PRESSURE SORES",
"Although discussion of pressure sores in the paraplegic patient is confined to the problems of reconstruction, it cannot be emphasised too strongly that the procedures to be described for the various types of decubitus ulceration are only a small facet ill the overall care of the paraplegic, and they must be regarded as merely providing the ulcerated area with afresh start in thebest conditions.",
"The sites in the paraplegic which are particu- larly liable to develop pressure sores lie over the pressure-bearing bony prominences. Compared with the sores which develop in the non-para- plegic, the ulcers tend to have an 'iceberg' qual- ity, with extensive undermining, and osteitis of",
"the underlying bone, or even pyoarthrosis in severe cases. Surgical treatment consists of the covering of the completely excised ulcer with a movable pad of healthy skin and subcutaneous tissue, and simultaneous reduction of any under- lying bony prominence which appears to be acting as a focal pressure point. This latter proced- ure is generally essential, since such promi- nences left untouched reproduce the mechanical pressure which was responsible for the original ulcer.",
"During the acute phase of the spinal injury, the common sites are over the sacrum and femoral trochanter; after recovery, prolonged sitting in a wheelchair makes the ischial area the most frequent site. Sacral ulcers tend to be large and flat with minimal undermining; ulcers of the trochanter and ischium usually have a small opening, leading into a large slough-lined cavity into the base of which the bony prominence projects.",
"The anaesthetic tissues of the paraplegic heal poorly, and with the slightest provocation the wound will following surgery. to heal Tension on suture lines must be avoided, haemostasis must be even more meticulous than usual, cavities and dead space must be positively eliminated - failure in anyone aspect will result in failure as a whole. If skin loss is minimal, exci- sion and direct closure may suffice, but in most instances a flap is needed. The secondary defect created by transfer of the flap has often to be grafted and, as discussed on p. 88, the graft need not necessarily be applied at the time of the flap transfer. The collection of a haematoma under the flap is particularly undesirable in the para- plegic patient, and leaving the secondary defect ungrafted in this way is a valuable way of ensur- ing that a large area is available through which any haematoma can drain instead of collecting under the flap to cause tension, infection and necrosis. The graft can be applied 7-10 days later.",
"fail",
"Sacral sores The appropriate type of flap depends on the shape of the ulcer. Frequently suitable is the bilateral flap of buttock skin based on the in- ferior gluteal fold (Fig. 8.1), and this double flap is especially useful in the sacral pressure sore in",
"PRESSURE SORE MANAGEMENT 137",
"Fig.8.1",
"Sacral pressure sore in a non-paraplegic patient, repaired using bilateral rotation-transposition flaps of buttock skin.",
"",
"the non-paraplegic patient. If the shape and extent of the ulcer make this flap unsuitable, alternatives are the transposed or rotation flap using buttock skin, extending on to the lumbar region (Fig. 8.2). Gluteus maximus has been incorporated into these flaps to add to their safety and effective- ness, and more recently flaps have been designed to use the gluteus maximus muscle in a more formal way (Fig. 8.3). Each muscle, together with a triangle of the overlying buttock skin, is detached from its sacral insertion and mobilised, preserving the inferior gluteal nerve and the gluteal vessels, and advanced to meet its fellow in the midline to reconstruct the postexcisional defect of the sacral ulcer, providing skin cover along with an underlying pad of muscle.",
"Fig. 8.2 Sacral and bilateral ischial ulcers in a paraplegic patient. the sacral ulcer repaired using a rotation flap of buttock skin. and the left ischial ulcer using a transposition flap of posterior thigh skin as shown in Figure 8.5.",
"In using the glutei in this way there are several considerations which need to be taken into account, and which are not immediately appar- ent. One concerns the fact that gluteus maximus is not an expendable muscle, and if the transfer will result in denervation it can only be used in the paraplegic patient. The advancement myocu- taneous flap as described should retain the nerve supply and can thus be used in the non-para- plegic. The entire area is also extremely vascular, and dissection involving gluteus maximus, indeed dissection generally in this area, both in the paraplegic and non-paraplegic patient, involves considerable blood loss.",
"138 FUNDAMENTAL TECHNIQUES OF PLASTIC SURGERY",
"Fig. 8.3 The vascular basis of the gluteus maximus myocutaneous flap. and its incorporation in a bilateral advancement flap to cover a sacral ulcer.",
"Trochanteric sores The greater trochanter is the projection which determines the site of the trochanteric ulcer. Initially, the main cavity of the ulcer is the trochanteric bursa which overlies the projection and, if this alone is involved, permanent closure may be achieved without interfering with the bone. As the condition progresses the trochanter and neck of femur increasingly project into the cavity, and excision of trochanter and appropri- ate cortex of the shaft is required to let the soft tissues collapse and obliterate the cavity. In the most severe instances a pyoarthrosis of the hip joint may develop and, once present, this complica- tion is virtually impossible to eradicate without amputation of the limb.",
"The ulcer is so undermined in most cases that free skin grafting is seldom practicable. Cover by a flap is necessary. When this takes the form of a skin flap a transposed flap is used; its precise situ-",
"ation and shape will depend on the size and shape of the ulcer, with the proviso always that the secondary defect should be on an area free from subsequent weightbearing. Added safety can be provided by incorporating the iliotibial tract in the flap, in the form of a tensor fasciae latae myocutaneous flap (Figs 8.4 and 8.7).",
"Tensor fasciae latae flap In the lateral aspect of the thigh the fascia lata is markedly thickened to form the iliotibial tract, receiving into its upper part the insertions of glu- teus maximus behind and tensor fasciae latae further forward. As the tract passes distally it overlies vastus lateralis but there is no attach- ment between the two structures. Although the fascia lata encircles the thigh the thickening which constitutes the iliotibial tract virtually ceases along a line dropped vertically from the anterior superior iliac spine.",
"PRESSURE SORE MANAGEMENT 139",
"/q1I (\\ II I",
"i'",
"Profunda",
"'L.ldf..-;-,-;-;,---:-:---,-- fem0 ris",
"artery",
"Descending branch",
"Fig.8.4 The vascular basis and the typical dimensions of the tensor fasciae lame myocutaneous flap.",
"The tensor fasciae latae muscle is perfused in its lowest part from the ascending branches of the lateral femoral circumflex vessels which reach it about the level of the pubic tubercle. This supply appears to extend into the upper two- thirds of the iliotibial tract.",
"The tensor fasciae latae myocutaneous flap is designed on the lateral aspect of the thigh with its base superior, and makes use of the iliotibial tract as its 'muscular' element. Its anterior bor- der runs vertically along a line brought just lateral to the anterior superior iliac spine in order to avoid the lateral cutaneous nerve of thigh. Its posterior border approximates to the line running down from the greater trochanter. The length of the flap is determined by the geometry of the transfer but it can safely extend to the junc- tion between the upper two-thirds and the lower third of the thigh. The flap is technically easy to raise because the plane between the tract and vastus lateralis is so well defined and avascular. It can be raised proximally to the level of the pubic tubercle. Its usual use is as a transposed flap, moved posteriorly to cover a defect of",
"trochanter and/or ischium. The secondary defect is split skin grafted as a rule.",
"Ischial sores The cavity of the ulcer consists of the ischial bursa but, as the condition progresses and extends, the ischial tuberosity increasingly pro- jects into the cavity and becomes the seat of chronic osteitis. An advance in the treatment of this type of ulcer has been reduction of the prominence of the ischial tuberosity jointly with the appropriate soft tissue surgery. Even where the bone is not pathologically involved it is still the main cause of the ulceration.",
"When planning the appropriate flap the patient should have the hip flexed to imitate the sitting posture to ensure that residual scars do not overlie the tuberosity. A useful flap is very broadly based medially along the greater part of the thigh and moved upwards (Fig. 8.5). A virtue in this situation is its generous dimensions which, on the one hand make it extremely safe, and on the other permit further rotation (Fig. 8.6) should the ulcer recur. An added advantage is",
"'040 FUNDAMENTAL TECHNIQUES OF PLASTIC SURGERY",
"A",
"8",
"c",
"o",
"Fig. 8.5 A transposition flap of posterior thigh skin used to repair the defect left following excision of the ischial ulcer, and reduction of the projection of the ischial tuberosity. the cavity of the ischial area filled by detaching near its lower end and mobilising such biceps femoris muscle as is available.",
"that it provides simultaneous access to the ham- string muscles, and the atrophic remnant of the biceps muscle can be detached at its lower end and mobilised by dividing approximately half of the perforating vessels. The muscle can then be rolled up and tucked into the dead space left by the ischiectomy.",
"An alternative possibility is the tensor fasciae latae flap. Used for this purpose the length of the flap required is rather greater than for the",
"Fig. 8.6 Rotation of a previously used posterior thigh flap to repair a recurrent ischial pressure sore in a paraplegic patient. The segment of the flap beyond the line of the scar of the previous flap was delayed prior to rotation of the flap.",
"Fig. 8.7 A tensor fasciae latae flap used to provide simultaneous cover for a trochanteric and an ischial pressure sore in a paraplegic patient. showing (A) the defect. and (B) the flap raised and trans- posed. ready for suture.",
"trochanteric ulcer, a flap of 30 em or even more being needed. Where trochanteric and ischial ulcers coexist, the single flap may be able to cover both simultaneously (Fig. 8.7).",
"Total obliteration of the pressure point by ischiectomy, used in conjunction with an appro- priate flap for skin cover, appeared to be a prom- ising advance when it was first introduced. The late results have shown up its deficiencies. The major defect as in all procedures in the para- plegic is the tendency to recurrent or fresh ulcera- tion. The body weight has to be supported somewhere, and the effect of surgical procedures",
"PRESSURE SORE MANAGEMENT",
"is merely to transfer the pressure to a new area where a fresh sore is liable to develop. Following the use of ischiectomy, sores tend to develop on the posterior aspect of the thigh at trochanteric level and also towards the perineum and scro- tum. Ulcers in these areas, particularly the perineoscrotal, are extremely intractable, and with flaps already used for ischial sores are very difficult to deal with surgically.",
"With the ischial ulcer it is better to compromise and, instead of carrying out a formal ischiecto- my, to restrict bony excision to the obvious area of projection.",
"141",
"Limb trauma",
"Limb trauma predominantly involves skin, muscle and bone. Infection does not loom large as a hazard if the skin is not involved, but it has to be added to the list of possible complications when there is a break in the skin barrier, and this can be particularly serious when a fracture is part of the injury. It is for this reason that the effective provision of skin cover becomes a matter of urgency, though its provision has to be coordinated with the management of the other damaged structures, each of which carries its own imperative.",
"When skin loss is a major element in a limb injury, whether in isolation or as part of combined skin-bone trauma, it usually takes the form of degloving.",
"DEGLOVING INJURIES",
"The distinguishing feature of a degloving injury is the flaying of the skin, the result of a severe shearing strain, as for example in the 'running over' of the limb by a pneumatic tyre (Fig. 9.1). The plane through which the skin is detached is sometimes superficial, sometimes deep to the investing layer of deep fascia, and the skin may tear, creating a flap. Alternatively, the skin may remain intact, though detached deeply. The effect of detachment is to disrupt the perfusion pattern of the skin and superficial fascia. The vessels which reach the investing layer of deep fascia and through it perfuse the superficial fascia and skin, described on p. 67, are avulsed. The sudden extreme tension set up by the the vascular shearing strain also disrupts",
"9",
"network in the superficial fascia and skin, the combined effect being to prod uce ischaemic necrosis of skin which is detached. Depending on the mechanism of the injury there may also be friction burning of part or all of the degloved skin.",
"the",
"At first sight, the severity and extent of the damage to the skin circulation may not be particularly striking, but there is failure of the skin to blanch when pressure is applied, with return of colour when the pressure is released",
"Point of maximum tension",
",",
"I",
"I",
"I",
"I",
"I",
"I",
"1\\ \\",
"\\",
"\\",
"\\",
"\\",
"\\",
",",
"\\",
"'Physiological' degloving",
"'Anatomical' degloving",
"Fig.9.1",
"The mechanism of degloving.",
"143",
",.... FUNDAMENTAL TECHNIQUES OF PLASTIC SURGERY",
"and, when a skin edge is present, no dermal bleeding, both indicating absence of circulation. The skin area demonstrated to be devoid of circulation, although its epidermis at that point in time may be viable, progresses to ischaemic necrosis.",
"Accurate assessment of the extent of the area lacking circulation is desirable, and fluorescein, administered intravenously, 15mg/kg in 200ml of saline, over a period of 10 min has been used as a visual aid to estimating this. Viewed under ultraviolet light, normally perfused skin clearly fluoresces while avascular skin does not. Unfortunately, difficulty is liable to arise in the areas where help is most needed, where damage is partial. Such areas show a mottled pattern of fluorescence. Towards the margin of a degloved flap they are likely to go on at least to superficial necrosis, and are probably better managed as part of the frankly ischaemic skin area.",
"The principle of management in such an injury is that the non-viable skin area should be excised, and the defect split-skin grafted with the minimum of delay. The patient's general condition may overshadow the local and dictate at least temporary delay, but a local assessment should be made as soon as possible, and the excision carried out. It is positive evidence of perfusion which decides viability, and in its absence the skin should be excised.",
"It is not essential that the graft should be applied immediately following excision. There may be advantage in waiting for a few days to allow for further excision if any dubious areas remain, either of the degloved skin or of the sur- face exposed by the degloving. Grafting with a minimum of delay is nonetheless desirable (Fig. 9.2). As much skin as possible should be applied, with priority given to the flexures and areas with underlying tendons.",
"Damage to muscle may also be present, recognisable by the darkening of the muscle fibres, and failure of the fibres to contract when pinched. Excision to healthy muscle is then required, since it is only on a healthy base that a graft will take. Residual necrotic muscle will mean local graft failure.",
"The fact that the skin after the injury, though without a blood supply, remains viable makes it",
"Fig.9.2 A degloving injury of the leg resurfaced primarily with split skin grafts.",
"The extent of the injury (A). the appearance 7 days later (8). following the application of sheet split skin grafts immediately following debridement of the wound. and the healed appearance (e). with full function.",
"possible to use it on occasion as a free skin graft to resurface the area at least in part. If it appears largely undamaged, it is worth considering its reapplication to the debrided surface as a full thickness skin graft after its subcutaneous fat has been carefully excised. Successful use of the skin in this way gives a better ultimate result than a split skin graft cut from elsewhere.",
"It is important that the nature of the injury and its vascular significance should be recognised, so that the situation is not allowed to drift until a slough forms and separates slowly and spontan- eously. If the injury has not been recognised primarily, and only becomes obvious when a",
"slough forms, it should be excised as soon as it has demarcated, and the area immediately grafted.",
"SKIN-BONE INJURIES",
"The fractures most often associated with skin loss involve the long bones, tibia and, much less frequently, ulna. Before the management of such an injury can usefully be discussed, is necessary to have an understanding of the principles which underlie its treatment, for the detailed handling of the injury is the expression in practical terms of these principles. A primary objective in treating such a combined injury is to prevent infection, and this is achieved by fixing the fracture and by providing skin cover to isolate it from the surface.",
"An X-ray of a fracture gives an incomplete picture of the total injury in the way that it ignores the soft tissue element. The severity of this latter element and the form it takes are of major importance when the soft tissues around the fracture site - muscle, fascia and skin - are being assessed for damage and even viability, or as potential sources to provide cover for the bone, fractured or merely bared by the injury.",
"The injury to muscle can take the form of obvious tearing of muscle fibres, but damage at a less gross level can also occur, resulting in swelling of the muscle belly. Even so, muscle is unexpectedly resilient in practice, and has been successfully transferred in the form of a flap shortly after the original injury, though its use in this way is not without risk.",
"The injury to skin takes a different form, seen most strikingly when part of the injury involves degloving of the skin and superficial fascia. Degloving as an isolated injury has already been described, but when it is associated with bony trauma it has to be considered also in relation to the extent to which it might be possible to use de gloved skin and its underlying layer of fascia as a local flap to cover the surface defect. Before the use of such skin can be considered, there would have to be clear evidence of circulation in the skin area, and even when this criterion has been fulfilled it has not proved a reliable flap source.",
"it",
"LIMBTRAUMA 145",
"The various elements of a mixed skin-bone injury can vary widely in their severity, and the plastic surgeon is liable to have a biased view of the situation. He is likely to see only the injuries at the most severe end of the spectrum, and assume that they are the norm, whereas in fact the less severe injuries are being successfully managed by the orthopaedic surgeon on his own. Nonetheless, if a harmonious and effective relationship is to be built up, the plastic surgeon is best invited to see the patient at the acute stage if the orthopaedic surgeon considers that there is even a remote possibility that he may have to be involved in treatment later.",
"Role of periosteum The periosteum plays a crucial role both in the management of the fracture and in the provision In addition to providing an of skin cover. effective barrier to infection, a significant proportion of the blood supply to the superficial cortex of through the explains why avascular periosteum. This necrosis of the superficial cortex and surface sequestration regularly occur where bone is left denuded of periosteum by the injury, and also provides the reason why nothing should be done in manipulating and fixing the fracture which might denude more bone or add to the periosteum already damaged. If plates and screws are being used they should be applied on top of the periosteum even though this may add to the technical problems of fixation. The surgeon has to accept the therapeutic problems posed by the cortical bone denuded by the injury, but he should not add to them by surgically stripping periosteum.",
"the bone reaches it",
"In relation to the role of the periosteum in the provision of skin cover, cortical bone which is covered with periosteum will accept a split skin graft; cortical bone denuded of periosteum cannot be expected to accept a split skin graft.",
"Fixation of the fracture Fixation of the fracture is the responsibility of the orthopaedic surgeon, but in choosing the method he has also to ensure that his choice does tissue not conflict with the needs of the soft injury. The essence of the method used is that it",
"146 FUNDAMENTAL TECHNIQUES OF PLASTIC SURGERY",
"should provide rigid fixation of the fracture, and the potential alternatives are plaster of Paris, with or without a window, internal fixation using plate and screws, intramedullary nail fixation and external fixation frame.",
"With plaster of Paris fixation there is no access to the area of skin loss unless a large window is cut. A window of adequate size is likely to affect fixation of the fracture adversely, and on these grounds is undesirable. However, if a window is to be avoided, the skin cover used at the time of primary treatment has to be restricted to split skin grafting at the very most, and it is therefore not an option where skin damage is a significant part of the total injury. Even without a window, plaster of Paris fixation alone may not be considered capable of providing the rigid fixation regarded as essential when the fracture is unstable.",
"Internal fixation using plates and screws may be an effective method in the closed tibial fracture but in the compound fracture with skin loss its role is more open to question. The site of skin the subcutaneous surface of the tibia, and addition of the incisions and dissection required to expose the bone to insert an anteriorly applied plate extends the area of soft tissue damage to an undesirable degree, in the surface where the tibia is most vulnerable from the point of view of overlying skin necrosis. Application of the plate to the posterior surface is an alternative, but the posterior approach has not become standard practice in this context.",
"loss",
"nearly",
"always",
"overlies",
"In the comminuted fracture particularly, the method is unlikely to be the one of choice, and even in the absence of comminution it has the serious disadvantage of adding considerably to the amount of bone exposed and soft tissue dissected.",
"Intramedullary nail fixation might appear to have adverse factors. It might well be felt that the exposure of the entire medullary cavity to the surface, which the insertion of such a nail entails, would invite the spread of infection from end to end of is being successfully used, admittedly in conjunction with the provision of well-vascularised flap cover, would indicate that this fear is largely",
"the bone. The fact",
"that",
"it",
"groundless. Viewed in relation to the provision of skin cover it has the considerable virtue that its use does not place any restraints on the method of providing skin cover selected by the plastic surgeon.",
"The external fixation frame also has the virtue of leaving the fracture site unimpeded from the point of view of providing skin cover. The transfixion pins inserted into the bone at a distance from the fracture provide virtually absolute stability without interfering with the fracture site once the frame has been set up. The absence of interference with the soft tissues, damaged or undamaged, at or around the fracture site, allows the two components of the injury, bone and soft tissue, to be managed with minimal reference one to the other. Almost the only aspect of the bony fixation which may affect soft tissue management is the site of insertion of the pins. This determines the interconnecting bar, and thought should be given to this aspect to ensure that it does not make the reconstruction which the plastic surgeon wishes to use less easy technically, or even impossible. With this proviso, it leaves the entire techniques available for use.",
"the line of",
"range of",
"reconstructive",
"Provision of skin cover In the combined injury of skin and skeleton, skin damage can vary from minimal up to extensive degloving.",
"Where skin loss has been minor, but closure achieved by direct is often under tension, a 'relaxation incision' recommended. The idea is that by making such an incision, tension will be reduced, and skin closure will be easier. The method sounds safe enough in theory, but it is less so in practice. A 'relaxing' incision really creates a bipedicled flap which moves across to allow closure of the original wound. It is a well-recognised fact that even in optimal circumstances a bipedicled flap transferred in this way is an unsafe procedure and is liable to necrose. Used in a mixed skin and skeletal injury it is even more hazardous, for soft tissue damage and degloving have so often added their quota to the local devitalisation of skin. The presence of degloving is a virtual",
"suture",
"can",
"only",
"be",
"contraindication to its use, and even in the absence of degloving the method should be used with the greatest of care. It is likely to be safest and most effective when closure is difficult because of local swelling of the limb from oedema and haemorrhage, rather than because of skin loss. The incision itself should be straight, placed at a considerable distance from the wound, and run in the long axis of the limb. Undermining of the skin should be avoided. When skin loss is more extensive,",
"the replacement methods available are free skin graft, skin or fasciocutaneous flap, muscle or myocutaneous flap, and free flap - usually used individually, occasionally in combination.",
"Despite the alternative reconstructive methods available today, split skin grafting should be the first choice if the raw surface is suitable. In determining which surfaces are suitable for grafting, the key role of the periosteum has already been stressed. Excision of avascular tissue, fixation of the fracture, conservation of periosteum, closure of joint by suture of the capsule when possible, or cover with a muscle flap to create a graftable surface - all combine to give a graft the best chance to take. The split skin graft has the great virtue also of being able on occasion to stabilise a clinical situation at minimal cost to the patient. It gives the surgeon a breathing space, and even if is unsuitable as definitive cover it is possible to replace it at leisure once the patient's condition has become stable.",
"the graft",
"Split skin grafting can be used in conjunction with other techniques. A muscle flap, for example, may be needed to cover the bare bone element of a composite injury, but the graft can still be applied all around the area covered by the muscle as well as providing cover for the muscle itself.",
"Skin and fasciocutaneous flaps, rotation or transposed, raised locally, have little if any place in acute injuries of this sort. Although safer when they include the fascial layer, they have not been assessed objectively in the context of acute skin-bone trauma. Before contemplating the use of a flap of this type, it would be essential to gauge the damage to the overall vascularity of the skin which it is proposed to use as the flap, particularly when an element of degloving is",
"LlMBTRAUMA 147",
"involved. In any case the size and shape of the typical defect and the state of the surrounding skin would preclude its use.",
"The cross-leg flap may have been increased in safety by incorporating the fascial layer, but for the surgeon with little experience in its use (and such experience is becoming rarer as the method is losing popularity in other contexts) it must be regarded as distinctly hazardous. Such flaps particular have circumspection, even as elective procedures in older patients, because of peripheral vascular problems in the ageing limb, and problems of joint stiffness. These considerations would apply with redoubled force in an emergency situation, especially in the lower limb where the problem really arises. In a lower limb injury a cross-leg fasciocutaneous flap can be contemplated only by an experienced operator, in the young patient with unimpaired peripheral circulation and joints capable of tolerating the immobilisation - a combination of limitations likely to restrict its usage to near zero.",
"also",
"to",
"be",
"used with",
"Local fasciocutaneous flaps being generally unsuitable for use at the acute stage of a combined skin-bone injury, the question arises whether the skin-fascia combination is capable of recovering sufficiently to be safe to use at a later date, and if so when. It is difficult to believe that degloved skin can recover to total circulatory normality, though it has been reported for as subsequent reconstruction, which would suggest that at least a degree of recovery can take place. The cautious surgeon is unlikely to accept this as a blanket finding. Reasoning from other clinical contexts, such observations as the amount of superficial scarring of the skin, its degree of comparative mobility, and the thickness of the layer of superficial fascia, would all playa part in decision making.",
"being successfully used",
"The use of muscle and myocutaneous flaps raised locally would be confined to defects of the knee and upper half of the anterior tibia. The medial head of gastrocnemius is capable of covering the medial aspect of the knee joint and the upper third of the tibia.",
"Transfer is probably better carried out as a muscle flap rather than as a myocutaneous flap",
"14.",
"FUNDAMENTAL TECHNIQUES OF PlASTIC SURGERY",
"when the option is present. Even used in late reconstruction the virtues of a muscle flap with grafting of its exposed surface, as compared with grafting of the secondary defect left by the transfer of the corresponding myocutaneous flap, have been recognised. The potential hazard of the presence of muscle damage in assessing its usage in muscle transfer has already been discussed, and its unexpected tolerance of transfer as a flap even when showing signs of injury.",
"Where the necessary facilities and micro- vascular expertise have been available, free flaps, (fasciocutaneous, muscle and myocutane- ous), have been increasingly used in managing the more severe mixed injuries of skin and bone. The techniques involved may be demanding, but the results, judged in terms of healing time, time to fracture union and time in hospital, are all better. Muscle, transferred as a flap, appears also to bring with it a degree of vascularity which, used to cover a surface which shows damage, prevents the damage progressing to necrosis, and it seems to retain these virtues even when it is part of a free flap. In a situation where periosteal stripping and continuing exposure of bare cortical bone is so often followed by sequestration of is a its outer particularly valuable attribute. The muscle is also able to fill any bony defect which may have resulted from the removal of comminuted bony fragments judged to be avascular, and in this way eliminate dead space.",
"layer,",
"this",
"A free flap frequently used is the latissimus dorsi flap. Its long pedicle and reliable vessels of a good calibre make it among the less technically demanding transfers. The large area of muscle which can be transferred also makes it possible to cope with the more extensive defects successfully so that, even if part of the area of skin loss is graftable, it may still be convenient to cover the entire area with the flap. The rectus abdominis flap has become a popular, and equally suitable, alternative. Both flaps tend to be used as muscle rather than as myocutaneous flaps, leaving skin cover to be provided by grafting.",
"For the smaller defect, alternatives are the radial forearm, the lateral upper arm flap and the",
"scapular flap. The comparative virtues of the three are discussed in Chapter 4.",
"the fracture site chosen for anastomosis will depend on the site of injury and the extent of vascular involvement. They must be examined with extreme care for signs of damage, and interpositional vein grafts may be needed if it proves necessary to reach a healthy vessel wall which can be used for anastomosis. Immediately post-traumatic, reliable criteria of total normality of the vessel wall present a problem. Seven to 10 days later, signs of damage to vessels are more obvious, with oedema and thickening of the wall.",
"The vessels at",
"The state of the other main arteries of the limb may also need to be assessed to ascertain to what extent the artery chosen for anastomosis is sustaining the limb alone or with minimal assistance from the other main arteries. The findings may preclude the use of end-to-end anastomosis to the flap artery, and even in the absence of damage to other vessels end-to-side anastomosis may be preferable. The information provided by arteriography is, as already stressed (p. 102), only partial and must be matched against the findings at operation.",
"Clinical management Once the fracture has been reduced and fixed, it becomes possible to make a proper assessment of the soft tissue component of the injury, and carry out an initial excision of irreparably damaged tissue, skin, fascia and muscle. The criteria for assessing viability of skin have already been described, and the excision of damaged fascia can safely be radical, since the muscle surface exposed will accept a graft. Excision of fascia may of decompressing muscle swollen and oedematous as a result of the injury. The only structure, vessels and nerves apart, which should be managed conservatively already throughout stressed, periosteum. Even at this early stage, some idea of the reconstruction likely to be required is usually possible, and a provisional strategy can be drawn up.",
"also",
"have",
"the",
"beneficial",
"effect",
"is,",
"as",
"If skin grafting is considered feasible, it is not obligatory to apply the graft there and then. There is much to be said for a 'second look', with",
"a further debridement in order to improve the surface. Carried out 2-3 days later, the further debridement should leave only viable soft tissue exposed, and definitive decisions regarding reconstruction can be made. When a skin graft is used after such a delay, the ultimate healing time may actually be reduced, with take of the graft becoming 100%, rather than being patchy.",
"The decision regarding the best form of skin cover will depend very much on the site of the injury, the state of the bone, and the surface it presents. This, in turn, may well depend on the type of fracture, whether it is comminuted or not, and the estimated viability of any detached fragments. The site most often involved by such a mixed injury is the lower half of the tibia, and in that site, if a reconstruction requires more than merely a free skin graft, the most effective alternative is likely to be a free flap, and the greater the deficiency in depth the more valuable will be the muscle component of the free flap. This aspect might determine whether or not a latissimus dorsi or rectus abdominis muscle flap is chosen.",
"The timing of free flap reconstructions remains controversial - whether they should be carried out at the acute stage or postponed for a few days. The advocates of definitive free flap the acute stage tend to be reconstruction at enthusiasts for the method, but for most plastic surgeons the more severe forms of these mixed injuries are infrequent, and the results claimed for 'acute' free flap transfers are not necessarily repeatable by the occasional operator, who perhaps should be more cautious. What can be stated with certainty is that, if the decision is made to use an immediate or even a delayed primary free flap, the debridement which immediately precedes the application of the flap should be more than usually thorough, making sure that no non-viable tissue is left to provide a focus of potential infection.",
"In managing these injuries, the question must arise at some stage whether or not a damaged lower leg and foot is salvageable. The question is not whether the limb can be preserved viable, but whether the result will be a useful functioning limb. Severely injured lower limbs are salvaged today in a manner which would",
"LIMB TRAUMA 149",
"have been inconceivable until comparatively recently, and this is extremely satisfactory. As with many advances, however, the pendulum may have swung further than is ultimately desirable, with limbs being preserved which are never likely to function effectively. Such results represent a triumph of enthusiasm for a technique over realism concerning its results. The injury which is likely to be most crippling in the long term is one where there is anaesthesia of the weightbearing surface of the foot. Experience in other contexts has shown that such a foot does not do well. It would be wrong to deprive a patient of the chance to save his lower limb entire but it should also be recognised that on occasion conservation can be carried too far. With the currently available prostheses, a below- knee amputation need not be a significant disability, and the surgeon needs to compare the alternatives both in terms of final function and in terms of in hospital. Without suggesting that a decision should be made at the acute stage, the possibility that amputation may be required, if the possibility is a real one, should be put to the patient early on, and a decision, if it has to be made, should not be delayed. As time goes on the patient likely to become increasingly unrealistic, and unwilling to face an unpleasant truth and, having already spent time, may wish to continue in the forlorn hope of ultimate success.",
"time spent",
"is",
"A further aspect of the management of tibial fractures associated with skin loss which is often neglected concerns the ankle and foot. In the absence of positive steps taken to prevent its occurrence, one regularly sees clawing of the toes being allowed to develop, often with a foot-drop as well. This becomes degree of to correct, increasingly difficult and left uncorrected, the patient ends up unable to walk properly, even after the fracture is united and the soft tissues are stable.",
"OSTEITIS AND INFECTED FRACTURES",
"When the plastic surgeon is asked to help in managing a problem arising from infection occurring in a bone, the bone involved is nearly",
"150 FUNDAMENTAL TECHNIQUES OF PLASTIC SURGERY",
"always the tibia. The pathology is usually one of periodic flare-ups of chronic osteitis, with the background either an old infected fracture or the residuum of acute osteitis, less frequently today with more effective control of the initial episode, possibly with the background of a sequestrum. The problem relates either to the skin overlying the subcutaneous border of the bone and/or the bone itself.",
"the",
"latter",
"There are several reasons why the tibia should be the bone so often involved. Apart from being the long bone whose shaft is probably most frequently fractured, it has a larger subcutaneous surface than any of the others. Less obviously significant, but probably just as important, a much smaller area of its total surface is covered with attached muscle. The cover provided by the extensive muscle attachments to the other long bones distances them from the surface, and eliminates to a large extent the problem of providing effective skin cover after surgery. In this they provide a sharp contrast to the problems created by the long subcutaneous surface of the tibia, particularly if the injury has involved skin damage, or there is the deep skin fixation which so often follows previous surgery in the area.",
"The muscles attached to a bone are also important providers of blood supply to the cortex to which they are attached. The lower half of the tibia, the segment of the shaft most at risk from fracture, has virtually no muscles attached to it, and this leaves perfusion of the bone largely reliant on its nutrient artery. In a comminuted fracture, bony fragments which appear on X-ray to be detached from the main tibial shaft cannot rely on the perfusion source which the presence of provide, increasing the likelihood of sequestration.",
"a muscle",
"attachment would",
"This explanation of the reasons why the problems exist provides at the same time some clues to their solution. At a clinical level one of the problems concerns the most effective way of replacing the scarred and deeply adherent skin overlying the tibial shaft. When chronic infection of the bone with periodic flare-ups is an additional problem, avascularity and sclerosis are added to the pattern. The objectives then become ones of providing stable skin cover for",
"the subcutaneous surface, trying to add to the blood supply of the sclerotic bone, and filling any defect in the bone which may result from the activities of the orthopaedic surgeon, if he has to carry out a sequestrectomy or remove sclerotic bone.",
"In managing the acute combined skin-bone injury, vascularised muscle used to cover the defect and fill any gaps in bony continuity has in been found to have a beneficial effect salvaging damaged tissues, and it has proved equally useful in these subsequent problems.",
"The form which soft tissue replacement should take, whether by fasciocutaneous or myocu- taneous flap, will depend on the local cir- cumstances, but it should be generous in area, and planned with enough reserve to cope with any minor infection which might arise from the bone subsequently. At which precise point the bony problem should be tackled in relation to the timing of the flap transfer is a matter for discussion with the orthopaedic surgeon but, in general, operation on the diseased bone should be undertaken only when it can be immediately and completely covered by the flap.",
"The extent of the typical area of pretibial scarring is likely to make the possibility of using local tissues to reconstruct the defect a remote one. The use of a distant flap is unavoidable, and the demands of time and patient comfort and convenience are strong arguments in favour of a free flap. The form it should take will depend on the details of the local problem. If skin replace- ment alone is required a fasciocutaneous flap would be adequate. If surgery of the bone will be required, and particularly if there is the possibility of dead space after its completion, or surgery of sclerotic, relatively avascular bone is involved, a flap which includes muscle is likely to be pre- ferable, bringing a more effective blood supply to the site, and capable of filling dead space.",
"Safe use of a free flap in this context requires as much knowledge as possible of any changes in the major vessels which may have resulted from the original injury. Caveats regarding the use of vessels which are already damaged, and the use of end-to-side rather than end-to-end anastomosis, have already been discussed in relation to the acute skin-bone injury.",
"TENDON AND NERVE INJURIES",
"When a nerve and/or tendon is injured in association with extensive loss of skin, and it is apparent at repair or reconstruction will be required, the management of that aspect of the overall defect has generally to be subordinated to the provision of skin cover. In order to function properly in the case of a tendon, or for axon regeneration in the case of a nerve, a covering of subcutaneous tissue as well as the skin is necessary, and this carries implication that cover by a flap will be required. When the skin defect is being reconstructed primarily using a flap, the possibility of carrying the tendon and/or nerve reconstruction out simultaneously theoretically exists, but the decision may well depend on the degree of experience of involved. The the surgeonis) considerations which would determine such a decision concern the degree of tissue damage and wound contamination present, and whether an adequate primary debridement is possible, whether failure to reconstruct primarily is likely to result in much poorer final function, and whether the posture which may be required of the tendon/nerve reconstruction will preclude the use of the method of providing skin cover considered otherwise appropriate. The cautious approach is to provide primary flap cover and carry out the tendon/nerve reconstruction as a secondary procedure.",
"the outset",
"that",
"their",
"When the initial skin cover has been provided by a free skin graft, tendon/nerve reconstruction has to await replacement of the graft by a flap. Here again the considerations are essentially the same as those involved in decision making at the acute stage, except tissue damage and that potential contamination are not part of the equation. A single-stage reconstruction, with the opportunity present for preoperative planning, simultaneous tendon/nerve reconstruction may be a reasonable approach; multi-staged, it is safer to wait until the flap transfer is complete and the flap well settled before carrying out the tendon/ nerve reconstruction.",
"Sometimes disease or previous injury makes it necessary to replace the overlying skin to allow surgery of bone, joint or tendon to be carried out.",
"LIMBTRAUMA 151",
"A flap is then usually required, and the con- siderations involved are similar to those de- scribed for the combined skin-tendon/nerve injury.",
"PLANTAR DEFECTS",
"The plantar aspect of the foot has two distinct types of skin surfaces, weightbearing and non- weightbearing. The major weightbearing areas are the heel, a strip corresponding to the line of the metatarsal heads, and a strip which joins the two, running along the lateral border of the foot. Subsidiary areas of weightbearing are present on the pulp areas of the toes, that of the great toe being much the largest. In static situations the heel carries the bulk of the body weight; activity increasingly transfers the weight to the skin overlying the metatarsal heads and the pulp areas of the toes, particularly the great toe.",
"The distinction between the two areas is matched by differences in their skin. Non- weightbearing skin is soft and barely more kerat- inised than skin in other sites; weightbearing skin is heavily keratinised, to a degree which depends on the demands which are put on it. The heel has a thicker keratin layer than elsewhere, and the foot of the barefoot indi- vidual shows a much greater degree of kerat- inisation of the weightbearing areas overall than the individual who habitually wears footwear.",
"Other adaptations to functional demands are also seen with the strong fibrous attachments which bind the skin deeply, countering the shearing strains to which the weightbearing skin is subject.",
"The literature on reconstruction of defects of the foot has demonstrated a general unwilling- ness to assess the long-term results of the reconstruction being described, and a failure to separate the defects according to whether the site involved is an obligatory weightbearing area or not. The few publications which have examined results critically from this point of view have demonstrated clearly that reconstructions of defects of the weightbearing areas have been successful in the long term only when the patient has been able, by altering posture or footwear,",
"152 FUNDAMENTAL TECHNIQUES OF PLASTIC SURGERY",
"to convert the site involved into one which is virtually non-weightbearing.",
"When one considers the degree of structural specialisation of such areas, the keratinisation of the epidermis and the deep fixation by fibrous septa to counter in the obligatory weightbearing areas, and the fact that these cannot be reproduced by any technique currently available, this lack of success is not surprising. Nonetheless, it is a fact which has to be kept in the forefront when options are being discussed with a patient.",
"shearing stresses",
"The defects which arise in practice vary in the site involved, in extent and in depth, both factors which influence the likely result. Factors which may also be relevant are the state of the patient's peripheral circulation and his tobacco smoking preclude habits. This reconstruction altogether.",
"latter",
"factor may",
"When the area is non-uieigntbearmg, the problem of reconstruction will depend on whether the surface exposed is graftable or not. If the defect is small in area a full thickness skin graft has certain advantages, experience being that such a graft develops better sensation than a split skin graft. A split skin graft may be unavoidable when the defect is more extensive, though the dermal cushion of a thick graft is then desirable. A problem which arises regularly following the grafting of such a defect is the subsequent development of a line of callosity with fissuring of the skin along the line of the skin adjoining such a graft, and there is no way of preventing its occurrence.",
"When the surface is unsuitable for grafting the type of flap used will depend on the extent and site involved. Defects confined to the non- weightbearing areas are typically small and a local flap may be possible. Transfer of such a flap is likely to leave a secondary defect and, in planning this, a weightbearing area should be avoided. The instep area, and the medial border of the foot extending on to the adjoining dorsum, may be potential areas on which the flap can be designed. The larger defect will require the use of a distant flap, and then its long-term success is",
"likely to depend on whether it is confined to a non-weightbearing area or strays on to one which bears weight.",
"Wilen the area is weightbearing, the problems of reconstruction are greatly increased, and much depends on the size of the defect. The small defect can often be grafted, and the whole skin graft has the advantage of being more likely to develop sensation. It may also function ade- quately, even in an obligatory weightbearing area, because its thickness compared with the depth of the defect leaves it forming a local depression, so that the weight is borne by the surrounding normal skin, though the develop- ment of an area of callus around may require regular paring.",
"The large defect is almost invariably the result of traumatic degloving, and the plane usually leaves virtually no soft tissue covering the bone, particularly over the calcaneum. This is the kind of injury which, despite being successfully covered with a flap, even one where a degree of sensation is provided, is unlikely to remain healed unless is prepared to the patient permanently subordinate his lifestyle to its demands, or is able to convert the posture of the foot the heel non- weightbearing. Few patients walk on soft tissue reconstructions of the heel, altering their gait to walk on the forefoot.",
"into one which leaves",
"One recognises that, in the initial assessment of such an injury, to consider amputation of a foot which, apart from its weightbearing surface, is normal, thought, unlikely to be mentioned to the patient and, if it is discussed, understandably likely to be rejected out of hand. Nonetheless, personal experience has been that patients, after experiencing years of have welcomed amputation, and found it an effective solution to their problems. When the outlook is being discussed with the patient with a severe degloving injury, involving the heel particularly, and a realistic prospect is being presented, amputation should perhaps be mentioned as the bottom line.",
"seems an outrageous",
"recurring",
"ulceration,",
"Neoplastic conditions",
"CARCINOMA OF THE BREAST",
"The problems of reconstruction which follow mastectomy have changed as the pattern of the mastectomy has changed. With movement away from radical mastectomy, through simple mastectomy, to 'lumpectomy', the need for skin postexcisional defect has grafting of diminished greatly, but it has been replaced by an increased demand for postmastectomy reconstruction. The first reconstructions which were used took the form of replacing the resected breast tissue with a latissimus dorsi myocutaneous flap (p, 96), augmented where necessary with a silicone implant. More recently the rectus abdominis myocutaneous flap (p. 98) has been used as an alternative. This latter method is particularly appropriate when, as regularly happens in such circumstances, the redundancy of her patient has lower a abdominal skin, the island of skin normally discarded in carrying out an 'apronectomy' being transferred to reconstruct the breast. Depending on its bulk, this flap may obviate the need for a subsequent implant.",
"the",
"The principle of tissue expansion (p. 121) has also been applied to the problem of the post- mastectomy defect, and the method has proved effective in creating a space which is then filled with a silicone implant. The use of such an implant creates its own problems, particularly those of and such a reconstruction seldom results in an appearance which matches the normal breast alongside it.",
"capsule",
"formation,",
"A controversial aspect of reconstruction after mastectomy, and one which has not been",
"10",
"the completely resolved, concerns whether reconstruction out should immediately postmastectomy or as a secondary procedure. There is a general feeling among plastic surgeons that secondary reconstruction is preferable. The patient undergoing recon- struction secondarily has seen her postmas- tectomy appearance and this makes her more that, while the ready to accept reconstruction will never match the original, it will still be a marked improvement. Tissue expansion requires that the area should be healed, and it is therefore unsuitable for use immediately postmastectomy.",
"be",
"carried",
"the",
"fact",
"TUMOURS OF THE SKIN",
"The specific problems of neoplasia of the head and neck apart, the policy of skin replacement following excision of a malignant tumour of skin might be expected to be a straightforward one, with subsidiary importance, and the split skin graft as the routine method employed because it does not obscure the field when recurrence is being watched for. One of the few situations which would require cover by a flap is a surface left following excision which is unsuitable for grafting, for example bare cortical bone or tendon. The virtues of a flap would then have to be weighed against the degree of certainty of adequate excision, particularly in depth, this being the part most likely to be hidden by the flap.",
"the",
"cosmetic",
"aspect",
"of",
"In many clinical situations and with many patients this is the standard approach, but it is",
"153",
"154 FUNDAMENTAL TECHNIQUES OF PLASTIC SURGERY",
"not one which commends itself to every patient. Some patients are extremely concerned about the appearance of the graft. The concern is likely to be greatest in the female patient where the defect is of the lower limb, generally because of the hollow resulting from resection to deep fascia, and replacement with the thinness of a graft. The surgeon may take the view that the skin graft, even with the hollow, is an acceptable price to pay for the greater certainty of early recognition of recurrence, but an important factor in this equation is the type of tumour and its pattern of spread.",
"The problem arises in its most acute form when the tumour is a malignant melanoma. In reconstructing the postexcision defect, the use of a free flap has been advocated, for example, in the lower leg. An added complication is the current trend to more conservative marginal excision when the Breslow thickness is at the lower end of the spectrum. With the strongly adverse effect that local recurrence of melanoma has on prognosis, neither approach can currently be regarded as definitive. The problem remains an aspect of management where the decision should be shared with a patient who has been adequately informed on the issues involved.",
"CARCINOMA OF HEAD AND NECK SKIN",
"This section is primarily concerned with the techniques used in reconstructing the defects resulting from the resection of neoplasms which involve the skin of the head and neck, but it should be stressed that, although the techniques are discussed in the context of neoplasia, comparable defects arise in these sitesfor other reasons, and the reconstructions described are equally effective in those circumstances. Also, to avoid repetition, the text, and the captions of thefigures used to illustrate it, have been coordinated to give an overall view of the reconstructions background, indications and limitations, as well as an account of thesurgical technique involved in carrying each out. The reconstruction used when a neoplasm of the skin of the head and neck is excised is determined by a variety of factors, predom-",
"discussed,",
"their",
"inantly pathological and anatomical, but tem- pered by those of cosmesis. To explore all of these aspects in depth is beyond the scope of this book, but there are certain principles which need to be discussed if the techniques pertaining to reconstruction of soft tissue defects in these sites are to be used effectively.",
"Excision and direct closure is used whenever possible, but when a defect cannot be closed directly the decision has to be made concerning the form that its reconstruction should take, whether a free skin graft or flap. The problem of deciding between the two arises because the demands of effective tumour treatment and those of cosmesis can conflict, and the surgeon has then to decide on the relative priority to give to each.",
"Pathological aspects These concern the influence that the tumour type, speed of growth and pattern of infiltration, are likely to have on certainty of tumour clearance, which is an important determining factor in whether a graft or a flap should be chosen to reconstruct the defect. When grafts and flaps are compared in relation to ease the of difference in thickness between the two is not of great importance, since marginal recurrence is likely to show equally quickly with either. It is in relation to the certainty of clearance in depth that the comparative thickness of graft and flap becomes important, to the extent that it may be a major determinant as to which should be used. The thin graft is less likely to hide recurrence, compared with the thicker flap which may conceal is disastrously extensive.",
"its",
"recognising marginal",
"recurrence,",
"recurrence until",
"it",
"In assessing the adequacy of depth clearance, whether it has proved possible to make use of a 'tumour barrier' may also determine suitability for use of a flap. Cartilage, and to a lesser extent bone also, are effective barriers to tumour spreading through them, and the act of removing them as part of the overall resection may convert the probability of clearance in depth into certainty, making the use of a flap, if preferable on cosmetic grounds, acceptable on pathological grounds.",
"Important also is the state of the surrounding skin. Skin tumours arise either in skin which has a the most neoplastically advanced focus in a skin which is diffusely dysplastic, most often as a result of sunlight damage and seen with increasing frequency in patients with organ transplants. Such skin is seldom suitable for transfer as a local is flap. Essentially premalignant, unsuitable on pathological grounds. Frequently atrophic, it is less than ideal for use as a local flap on technical grounds.",
"normal",
"appearance,",
"or",
"as",
"it",
"The infiltrative characteristics of the particular to remain tends tumour infiltrate deeply, may also superficial or influence the type of reconstruction. At the opposite ends of the spectrum are the localised basal cell carcinoma with its typically lateral spread, and the 'single' squamous cell carcinoma with its pattern of deep as well as marginal spread. The skin tumours arising on sun- damaged skin are also generally slow growing, and remain superficial unless neglected over a long period.",
"type, whether",
"it",
"In judging the certainty of clearance at a clinical level, the degree of experience of the surgeon becomes important, the accuracy of his judgment in assessing the clearances appropriate to the various tumour types, and his skill in making use of tumour barriers. A further factor in the equation is whether there will be any increase in the lethal potential of the tumour should it recur locally. This in turn may depend on the anatomical site involved, and whether the pattern of growth and infiltration has been altered by the previous ineffective use of radiotherapy.",
"Problems of cosmesis Skin grafts from certain donor areas give outstandingly good results in specific sites, but these apart, a well-chosen local flap will give a much better cosmetic result. Despite this, pathological factors cannot be ignored in making the choice. Skill in achieving the proper compromise between the two is generally a measure of experience. The less experienced surgeon should probably be using grafts more frequently, but most surgeons gradually",
"NEOPlASTIC CONDITIONS 155",
"move to an increasing use of flaps as their experience widens and their clinical judgment improves.",
"the pathological situation and those of cosmesis appear to be for example when depth incompatible, as clearance is doubtful but a flap is cosmetically desirable, a compromise may be reached where, with the patient's agreement, a graft is used as a temporary measure despite its poor appearance. This allows the site to be watched until cure can be regarded as virtually certain, say after 12-18 months, depending on the tumour type, at which time the graft can be replaced with the definitive and cosmetically satisfactory flap.",
"When the demands of",
"Sometimes the characteristics of the defect make the use of a prosthesis appropriate during the period of observation, Further, when the age the the patient and the complexity of of reconstruction envisaged are considered, and the appearance likely ultimately to be achieved is compared with the appearance wearing the prosthesis, it may be that the latter should be used as the permanent 'reconstruction'. This situation arises most often when the pinna, and the nose, are the organs to a lesser extent involved (Fig. 10.1).",
"Local flaps are generally preferable to distant flaps, from the point of view both of convenience and the cosmetic result. A distant flap almost invariably gives a poorer colour and texture match, and though it may weather with time, the improvement is seldom enough to make it comparable with a local flap. The most frequent reason for using a distant flap in preference to a local flap is the size of the defect.",
"Distant flaps can be pedicled or free, and which is chosen may depend on whether the surgeon has the facilities and expertise which allow him to make the choice. For the surgeon confined to the use of pedicled flaps, the deltopectoral flap waltzed to its destination is probably the most generally useful, though the restriction of its reach to the level of the zygomatic arch is a limiting factor. Even for the surgeon who has the liberty to choose, the deltopectoral flap is still worthy of consideration for defects within its reach.",
"156 FUNDAMENTAL TECHNIQUES OF PLASTIC SURGERY",
"Fig. 10.1 The use of prostheses in the management of postexcisional defects of the nose and of the pinna.",
"In both instances the prosthesis wasusedas the permanent 'reconstruction'. The ageandgeneral condition ofthe patient wasconsidered to preclude definitive reconstruction ofthe nasal defectusing the patient's own tissues. The defect ofthe pinna resulted fram excision ofa basal cell carcinoma of the pre-auricular skin, invalving the pinna and the outerpartofthe external acoustic meatus. The defectwas resurfaced with a split skingraft.",
"Occasional overriding circumstances dictate departure from these general principles, and examples of these are:",
"2. Where the tumour is inoperable in depth, the use of a flap is likely to make the use of radiotherapy easier and more effective.",
"1. Where a salivary fistula will be produced by the excision, it is preferable to carry out a primary definitive flap repair. Patients in general, and older patients in particular, do not tolerate such a fistula well. In any case such excisions usually involve the full thickness of the cheek or lip, and marginal recurrence alone need be watched for.",
"RECONSTRUCTIVE TECHNIQUES",
"The use that can be made of direct suture in closing a postexcisional defect is dependent on the local availability of the facial skin. This parallels the presence of a wrinkle pattern, so",
"often part of the ageing process, and how deeply it is etched in the skin. As already stressed (p. 0), the most obvious wrinkle patterns run at right angles to the underlying muscles of facial expression, concentrated around are the mouth, eyelids and forehead, creating the vertical striations around the mouth, the nasolabial fold, the glabellar pattern, the 'crow's foot' pattern radiating from the lateral canthus, and the forehead wrinkles. These, and their magnitude at different sites, are indicative of the habitual facial expression of each individual. The occasional adult is met in whom there is a virtual absence of wrinkling, usually in association with a degree of In such an facial individual, skin availability is minimal.",
"and",
"rotundity.",
"The wrinkle pattern indicates laxity of tissue on each side of the wrinkle, and it indicates also the line along which, or parallel to which, skin ellipses should be placed to give the best cosmetic result (Fig. 10.2).",
"An exception to this generalisation is provided by the forehead. The predominant wrinkle",
"Fig. 10.2 Examples of elliptical excisions making use of the wrinkle pattern of the face.",
"NEOPLASTIC CONDITIONS 157",
"pattern in the forehead is horizontal, but in making use of excision and direct suture an overriding consideration is maintenance of the symmetry of the eyebrows. The anatomy of the galea-frontalis complex, fixed above and mobile below, means that a horizontal ellipse, excised and closed directly, is liable to raise the level of the eyebrow and create asymmetry. Because of this, unless the excision is a narrow one, vertical excisions are to be preferred. Unexpectedly, they result in remarkably inconspicuous scars if the wrinkle lines are matched on both sides.",
"The design of local flaps depends on the effective use of the areas of availability present in most adult facial skin. Elsewhere in the body the secondary defect left by the transfer of a local flap is covered with a split skin graft, but in the face the flaps are designed to leave the secondary defect in a site of skin laxity, allowing direct suture to be used.",
"The more obvious sites of such laxity are in the mandibulomasseieric area, the nasolabial area, the temple, and the glabellar area (Fig. 10.3).",
"Fig. 10.3 The areas of skin availability which are exploited most frequently in local the mandibulomasseteric, nasolabial, glabellar and forehead areas, and the temple.",
"flap transfer -",
"158 FUNDAMENTAL TECHNIQUES OFPlASTIC SURGERY",
"The amount of available skin varies greatly in different individuals, and parallels the presence already stressed in of wrinkle lines. As discussing the use of direct suture, the face which is free of wrinkles has little skin available, lack makes it also unsuitable for and this designing local flaps.",
"Many local flaps have been described, and each surgeon has his favourites, but the most useful, and the most frequently used, are those which fill a regularly recurring therapeutic need, and at the areas of availability most effectively. As part of the process of assessing suitability for the use of a flap, and designing it, it is essential to work out which area of availability is being made use of, and ascertain whether it is available. If it is not present, the flap is unlikely to be the appropriate one to use.",
"the same time exploit",
"Flaps raised in the head and neck have certain distinctive qualities. They possess a richness of vascularity (Fig. 4.2), which permits a degree of laxity in design requirements unacceptable elsewhere. Below the level of the zygomatic arch, this is due to the richness of the dermal and subdermal circulation; above the arch, it is due to the wealth of vessels of a sizeable calibre which running form an horizontally between the skin and the galea, without deep connections, derived from vessels reaching the area from its periphery. The absence of deep connections means that delay of a scalp flap need never include elevation, and flaps with no overt axial pattern are raised both in the scalp and forehead which behave in transfer as though they did have such a system. In the face, the standard plane for elevating a flap is subdermal, superficial to the facial muscles; in the neck, it is deep to platysma, and designed to include as much of the superficial venous system as possible; in the forehead, it is deep to frontalis; in the scalp, it is deep to the galea.",
"anastomotic",
"pattern",
"The smaller flaps raised in the face also have a rich enough blood supply to allow the precise thickness of the defect often to be duplicated in the segment of the flap to be inset, though it may be wise to thicken the flap to the standard plane in passing from the segment to be inset to the pedicle.",
"Fig. 10.4 defect of the cheek following excision of a basal cell carcinoma.",
"Inferiorly based rotation flap used to reconstruct a",
"The skin excess adjoining the ear lobule. created by transfer of the flap.was managed using the method shown in Figure 4.32. with the scar resulting from the triangular skin excision concealed in the postauricular sulcus.",
"The anterior margin ofthe flap is designed to be slightly longer than the defect, and in passing' back from the defect the curveofthe flap initially rises. Both of these steps are designed to ensure that no downwards traction on the lower eyelid which mightproduce ectropion results from transfer of the flap.",
"The copious blood supply of flaps raised in the face and scalp also permits their bridge segment to be left raw without any danger of infection,",
"for tubing is rarely technically possible. During the 2 weeks between initial transfer and division, the bridge segment tends to tube itself by fibrotic contraction of the raw surface and by marginal epithelialisation. If the bridge segment is being discarded after division, this is of no moment, but if it is being returned to the donor site, untubing requires complete excision of the fibrous tissue, and the marginal spread epithelium is also best removed. Even so, the flap usually remains a little narrower than it was when first raised, and the margins of the donor site may have to be mobilised to allow easy suture.",
"Following division of the bridge segment, it is usually safe to inset the flap straightaway and, as with the direct flap (Fig. 4.22), a little thinning of its margin may be necessary to allow it to sit neatly into the defect.",
"CHEEKS AND SUBMANDIBULARAREA",
"Defects of these sites may result from excision of tumours arising in the skin itself or tumours which have arisen in deeper structures, such as the parotid gland, and have spread to involve the skin, and they vary greatly in site and size. Full thickness cheek defects can also result from deeply invasive tumours of the buccal mucosa, but their reconstruction is beyond the scope of this book.",
"Defects in the region of the nasolabial fold which are too broad for direct suture are sufficiently close to a flat skin surface often to allow effective use of the rotation flap principle. The site and shape of the typical defect which is appropriate for the method most often suits an inferiorly based flap (Fig. 10.4), and it can give an excellent result. With the site of the defect a little higher, the superiorly based rotation flap (Fig. 10.5) can be equally effective, though the occasions to use it arise less frequently. Defects over the parotid and the submandibular area are managed effectively by a free flap or a deltopectoral flap, the latter capable of reaching almost as far as the zygomatic arch (Fig. 4.34). The initial pallor of both flaps makes them somewhat conspicuous, but their appearance improves appreciably as they weather with time.",
"NEOPLASTIC CONDITIONS 159",
"FOREHEAD, TEMPLE AND SCALP",
"In these sites, there are anatomical differences in the constituents of the soft tissues, which in- fluence the reconstructions carried out. In the scalp, the skin, superficial fascia and galea are firmly attached to one another and are managed as a single structure. The tissue layer separating the galea from the pericranium provides the surgical and both reconstruction. Tumours superficial to the galea are resected to that plane, regardless of how they may be, and flaps are also superficial raised in that plane.",
"both",
"the",
"resections",
"and",
"plane,",
"in",
"resection",
"In the temporal area, the temporalis muscle, with its covering of temporal fascia, intervenes between the galea, thinner in this area, and the skull, and the surgical plane changes to one between the galea and the temporal fascia.",
"In the forehead, the galea is replaced by the frontalis muscle, and its presence makes it possible to raise flaps superficial as well as deep to it. The plane superficial to it is not a natural one, and has to be created by scalpel dissection. Its usage is generally confined to small flaps.",
"The use of these surgical planes leaves a",
"graftable surface, whether pericranial or fascial.",
"In planning reconstructions in these areas, a major consideration is the mixture of sites, some hair bearing, some hairless, with the need to retain each in its proper position. A further complicating factor may be the pattern of baldness, both the one already present and the one likely to develop.",
"Forehead defects can be primary, the result of a local tumour excision, or secondary to the In both instances their transfer of a flap. management depends on the width of the defect. When direct suture is possible, vertical closure is generally best, with care to match wrinkle lines. When a defect is too large for direct closure, it usually has to be split skin grafted, though the use of tissue expansion (p, 121) may allow the graft to be excised subsequently.",
"The temple is a regular site for small tumours, and their excision provides the problem of devising a reconstruction which will allow the",
"160 FUNDAMENTAL TECHNIQUES OF PLASTIC SURGERY",
"position of the anterior hairline and the eyebrow to be maintained, and the distance between them. An effective solution makes use of the rhomboid flap (Fig. 10.6). Around the lesion, with adequate local clearance, a rhomboid is drawn on the skin, with a short diagonal which equals the length of each side, giving the appearance of two equilateral triangles placed side by side. The diagonal is extended for a distance equal to its original length and, from the extremity, a back-cutting line is drawn parallel to one of the sides of the rhomboid. The rhomboid of tissue which contains the lesion is excised, and the rhomboid-shaped flap, outlined by the extended diagonal and the back-cut, is raised and transferred into the defect, which it fills neatly. The resulting secondary defect is closed directly.",
"Although the dimensions and shape of both defect and flap are precise, there are variables in planning, namely which of the four potential flaps should be used, and the axis around which the excisional rhomboid can be drawn. It is possible to manipulate these variables in such a way that closure of the secondary defect makes use of the laxity of skin present in the temple indicated by the wrinkle pattern area, as extending back from the outer canthus. With completion of the transfer, the rhomboid flap has filled the rhomboid defect, and the relevant distances and positions of the eyebrow and the hairline have been maintained.",
"scalp is dominated by its physical characteristics, its rigidity and inextensibility. Direct suture can only be used for small defects. It is generally",
"Management of defects of",
"the",
"Fig. 10.5 defect of the cheek following excision of a basal cell carcinoma.",
"Superiorly based rotation flap. used to reconstruct a",
"It was pOSSible to transfer this flap without a back-cut because of the degree of general facial skin laxity, indicated by a marked nasolabial skin crease continued down beyond the angle of the mouth. and a submandibular skin crease with mandibulomasseteric skin redundancy, resulting in vagueness of the pivot point, as referred to in Figure 4.30. The use of the skincreases os the line of the flap helped to conceal the (lnal scars. The junction line between the nose and the cheek was used as one of the resection margins, with the resection carried up towards the glabellar area beyond the medial extent of the medial canthus. This allowed the deep anchorage of the nasal skin to be used to counter the effect of gravity on the transferred flap. maintain it in its elevated POSition, and ensure that ectropion didnot result.",
"B / /",
"... \\ .. ..\u2022",
"I",
"I,,",
"I",
"I",
"I",
"NEOPLASTIC CONDITIONS 161",
"'scoring' of the galea will act as stated that relaxing of the but advancement achieved in practice is virtually nil. Fortunately, scalp is more tolerant of suture under tension than most tissues. The strength and inextensibility of the galea appear to prevent tension from being significantly transmitted to its vascular system.",
"incisions,",
"amount",
"The majority of defects which are too large for direct suture are split skin grafted. In their subsequent management, the tissue expander has an obvious role in eliminating the hairless area, should the pa tien t be concerned about it.",
"Flaps are used mainly when the tumour has extended into or beyond the pericranium, and its resection has left an area of bare skull. The area of hairbearing scalp without anatomical features around such defects makes it possible as a rule to design both transposition and rotation flaps. When a transposition flap is used, the excellence of the local blood supply makes it safe for a flap to be designed which is narrower than it is long (Fig. 4.25). In the case of a rotation flap, the rigidity of the scalp and its inextensibility set very strict limits on design. The flap should be made as large as possible, since that reduces the relative amount of rotation involved, and a back- cut is almost invariably required. The secondary defect it leaves has to be split skin grafted.",
"When the defect is of a size or in a site which precludes the design of a satisfactory local flap, the appropriate reconstruction today is probably a free flap.",
"LIPS",
"The orbicularis oris muscle acts as a sphincter, functioning in conjunction with dilator muscle groups in normal activity. In reconstructions of",
"The rhomboid flap used to reconstruct a defect of the Fig. 10.6 temple, leaving the relationship between the eyebrow and the hairline undisturbed, and the scar of closure of the secondary defect in a line of election.The steps of the transfer are shown (A), and the possible four flaps which are theoretically available to reconstruct the rhomboid defect (8). The flap selected in practice depends on the local availability of skin, and whether there is enough 'slack' present locally to allow the secondary defect to be closed directly.",
"/62 FUNDAMENTAL TECHNIQUES OF PLASTIC SURGERY",
"A",
"Fig. 10.7 The lip-shave with mucosal advancement. A Shows the lesion, multifocal premalignancy of the vermilion, suitable for such resurfacing. B The extent of the area of vermilion, angle-to-angle, to be excised. C The defect following the lip-shave.",
"Inset shows the extent and depth of the vermilionectomy.",
"D Closure of the defect of the vermilion by advancing the mucosa.",
"Undermining of the mucosa to permit advancement is not necessary, and its use can result in mucosal necrosis.",
"the lip the surgeon aims for continence of the oral cavity, and the maintenance of sphincteric function is his primary concern. An important contribution to the blood supply of the area is made by the labial arteries which run across each lip at the level of the skin-vermilion border between the mucosa and the muscles of the lip, meeting in the midline. These vessels make possible the safe transfer of the large segments of lip tissue used in several of the standard lip reconstructions.",
"The commonest tumour involving the lips is actinically induced squamous cell carcinoma, and the commonest site is the vermilion of the lower lip. It may arise as a single lesion, or as the most neoplastically advanced area in a diffusely premalignant vermilion, and the premalignant state can also occur on its own. Such actinically induced neoplasms generally progress slowly.",
"The vermilion which shows premalignant change is treated by a lip-shave (Fig. 10.7). The exposed vermilion is stripped from angle to",
"angle, and the mucosa lining the lip is advanced to close the defect and resurface the lip margin.",
"When there is also a focal area of grea ter induration suggestive of early invasion, and requiring greater clearance in depth, more of the substance of the vermilion needs to be removed. The roundness of the margin can then be restored by using a tongue flap (Fig. 10.8) to replace the resected tissue. This involves the raising of a mucomuscular flap along the anterior margin of the dorsum of the tongue, and suturing it to the skin resection margin of the lip, the flap being divided when it has settled in its new site, usually by the 10th day. The method is also used to provide a vermilion substitute in certain of the more elaborate reconstructions of the lower lip, described below.",
"A focus of frankly invasive squamous cell carcinoma is treated by excising a full thickness segment of the lip. The extent of the resection depends on the size of the tumour but, because the reconstructions used in practice require the creation",
"NEOPlASTIC CONDITIONS /63",
"1",
"jr",
"j f",
"VI",
"J",
"VI;",
"/''//'/1//1",
"3",
"4",
"6",
"8",
"I(",
"Fig. 10.8 The 'deep' lip-shave resurfaced with a tongue flap. r Shows the lesion of the lip,a squamous carcinoma showing very early invasion,with diffuse premalignancy of the remaining vermilion. and 2 the defect following excision. 3 Shows the line of the incision along the anterior margin of the tongue with the incision begun, 4 completed, and 5 the tongue flap raised. 6 Shows the depth of the excision, and how the tongue flap covers the defect, 7 the flap sutured in position, and 8 the result after the division of the flap 2 weeks after the initial transfer.",
"FUNDAMENTAL TECHNIQUES OF PLASTIC SURGERY",
"ofsuitably shaped defects, a certain amount of normal tissue is also excised as part of the total resection, beyond the excision necessary to clear the tumour, in order to create the desired shape. This principle applies also in many of the resection/reconstructions described in this chapter.",
"When the focus of invasive tumour coexists with diffuse premalignancy of the vermilion, the techniques of managing each element are used in combination, with a full thickness excision of the",
"main focus of squamous cell carcinoma, and a lip-shave premalignant vermilion.",
"of",
"the",
"remaining",
"Wedge excision and direct suture (Fig. 10.9) is used when the defect measures less than one- third of the lip, this being the breadth of lip which can be excised as a V, and closed directly without unduly constricting the opening. The defect is closed in two layers. Undermining of the skin for 2-3 mm defines a mucomuscular layer on each",
"Fig. 10.9 Wedge excision of the lower lip and direct closure.",
"The skin and subcutaneous layer is mobilised from the mucomuscular layer for 2-3 mm from the cut edge of the lip.A two-layer closure is used, muscle and mucosa joined with a single mucomuscular mattress absorbable suture which takes the strain of the closure, followed by skin closure.",
"Preoperative tattooing with Bonney's Blue is used to mark the junction of the skin and the red margin on each side of the excision to facilitate",
"subsequent matching. This technique is usedin lip reconstruaions where such matching is required.",
"side of the V, and the two are approximated with absorbable mucomuscular mattress vertical sutures. These take the strain of the repair and allow the skin edges to be closed without tension or tendency to invert. This suturing method is also used in the reconstructions described below. lip defects it is common practice to incorporate a Z-plasty of the vermilion to give a smoother margin to the lip, but in cancer surgery it is preferable to retain the straight suture line so that a single line only has to be watched for recurrence of tumour.",
"In repairing cleft",
"When resection results in loss of more than one-third of the lip, a formal reconstruction of the resected segment is required and, for the reason explained above, the excision is generally carried out in the form of a rectangle. When the defect is of one-half of the lower lip and extends to one angle, reconstruction can make use of the fan flap (Fig. 10.10A). In this an approximately circular flap of the full thickness of the cheek is raised lateral to the angle of the mouth and centred on it, with a final back-cut which reaches almost to the vermilion at the angle leaving a narrow pedicle, but one which contains the superior labial vessels. The flap is rotated to fill the lower lip defect and sutured in position. The effect is to leave the angle at its original site and maintain the width of the mouth. The secondary defect in the nasolabial area is closed directly, taking up the slack which is availability. The present reconstructed lip segment lacks a vermilion, and this is best provided by incorporating a tongue flap. When a combined resection and lip-shave of the remaining premalignant vermilion is required, a tongue flap is used to reconstruct the vermilion, angle to angle.",
"in",
"that",
"area",
"of",
"On the rare occasions when the entire lip is excised this fan flap technique can be duplicated, the flap raised on each side being rotated to meet its fellow on the opposite side (Fig. 10.10B), with a tongue flap to reconstruct the vermilion. The fan flap, single or double, designed in this way, is totally returns but gradually, although usually effectively. Motor activity is also restored, but more slowly.",
"denervated,",
"sensation",
"NEOPLASTIC CONDITIONS 165",
"When the lip defect involves up to two-thirds of its width, but preferably does not reach either angle, the reconstruction which produces the best result is the neurovascular (Karapandzic) fan \u00a3lap (Fig. 10.11). On each side of the rectangular defect, a circular line with radius equal to the vertical height of the lip defect is drawn on the skin around the angle, stopping just short of the alar base. Along the two lines the skin is incised, and deepened to, but not through, the mucosa, its proximity recognised by the presence of the grape-like clusters of minor salivary glands. the dilator muscles which are part of the orbicularis complex are divided, but the nerves, motor and sensory, and the blood vessels which cross the incision lines are carefully preserved. From each side of the defect the mucosa also is divided laterally for 1 em, This allows the excision margins to be approximated and sutured vertically, in the process rotating the fan flaps of skin and muscle on each side. The skin incisions on both sides are sutured together in their new position, taking up the disproportion all the way along. With preservation of the nerves, the reconstructed lip retains both motor power and sensation from the outset.",
"In the process,",
"The upper lip is a much less frequent site of tumour, but when excision leaves a full thickness defect it is usually filled with a lip- switch (Abbe) \u00a3lap (Fig. 10.12). This is a flap of the entire thickness of the lower lip, generally constructed in the form of a V, with a narrow pedicle containing the inferior labial vessels. It is rotated into the upper lip to reconstruct the defect, and the defect of the lower lip is closed directly. The presence of the pedicle tethers the lips together at its site until it is divided 2 weeks later. The lower lip is able to provide a flap up to one-third of its width, and the reconstruction can be used for defects at any site on the upper lip of a suitable size and shape. When the defect extends to the angle of the mouth, the same method can still be used, in the form of the Abbe-Estlander flap, the pedicle becoming the new angle (Fig. 10.13).",
"166 FUNDAMENTAL TECHNIQUES OFPLASTIC SUR.GERY",
"A",
"B",
"Fig. 10.10 The fan flap, used in combination with a tongue flap.to reconstruct full thickness defects of the lower lip. A The method used following resection of half of the lip.The extent of the resection of the lesion, a squamous carcinoma with associated diffuse premalignancy of the adjoining vermilion. is outlined and the flap used to reconstruct it. The flap. which includes the full thickness of the cheek, is rotated into the lip defect. leaving a nasolabial defect which is closed by advancing the nasolabial tissues.The vermilion is restored with a tongue flap. using the method shown in Figure 10.8.",
"B The fan flap used bilaterally in combination with a tongue flap following resection of the entire lip.The steps are similar to those shown",
"in A, but with a fan flap raised on each cheek. each flap rotating to form half of the reconstructed lip.",
"NEOPlASTIC CONDITIONS 167",
"A",
"Fig. 10.1 I lower lip. A The principle of the method. reconstructing the defect while preserving the neurovascular supply of the lip. B The steps of the reconstruction. Following the full thickness lip resection. a semicircular incision. centred on the angle of the mouth, is made on each side (I). from the resection margin round to the alar base. Except at its commencement. where the incision is made through the full thickness of the lip.skin and muscle only are divided (2). the nerves and blood vessels crossing the line of the incision being carefully preserved.The flaps which this creates on each side are advanced to the midline (3) and sutured to one another. the skin incisions being then closed (4). The very considerable virtue of thismethodlies in the maintenonce ofan intact nerve supply. motor andsensory, to the reconstruaed lip.",
"The neurovascular fan flap. used to reconstruct the defect left following full thickness resection of the central two-thirds of the",
"168 FUNDAMENTAL TECHNIQUES OF PlASTIC SURGERY",
"1",
"Fig. 10.12 The lip-switch (Abbe) flap. used to reconstruct a full thickness wedge excision of the upper lip.",
"The flap is outlined on the lower lip as a wedge to fill the defect of the full thickness of the upper lip resulting from the resection of the tumour involving the vermilion (I). Inset. the pedicle of the flap with its content of inferior labial artery. With the upper lip defect and the Abbe flap raised (2). its pedicle. as shown in the inset. is confined within the vermilion. The flap is rotated upwards on its pedicle (3). and filling the upper lip defect. is sutured in position (4) using the layered closure shown in Figure 10.9. with the lower lip defect closed in the same way.Two weeks later the pedicle is divided (5). and sutured following division, with (6) the final result.",
"The construction of the pedicle completely within the red margin allows the various skin-vermilion borders to be matchedat the stage of the initial",
"transfer so that no adjustment is required when the pedicle is divided.",
"NEOPlASTICCONDITIONS 169",
"'\"",
"2",
"z:\u00bb, , II!!",
"... /{ II",
"'I\" I",
",JlIIIII' 'IJ",
"1",
"5",
",1111/;/'11,/1 C; I/!'",
"I( I/f/////1",
"Fig. 10.13 The modified lip-switch (Abbe-Estlander) flap.This flap is used when the defect of the lip is at the angle of the mouth. and the pedicle of the flap becomes the angle of the reconstructed mouth.",
"The lesion is of the lower lip directly adjoining the angle of the mouth, shown with the resection outlined (I). and the flap marked out on the upper lip.The resection is carried out (2). and the flap raised. its pedicle similar to that shown in Figure I0.12.The flap is rotated into the defect (3). and sutured in position. using the two-layer closure shown in Figure 10.9;suture of the skin (4). completes the reconstruction, with (5) the final result.",
"170 FUNDAMENTAL TECHNIQUES OF PLASTIC SURGERY",
"EYELIDS",
"The tarsal plates form the skeletal basis of both eyelids, held against eyeball by the attachment of the palpebral ligaments, medial and lateral, to the margin of the orbit. Their strength is not great and, in the lower eyelid to particularly, tightness of the skin, resulting in ectropion.",
"the",
"they are very susceptible",
"In the upper eyelid, an element of skin laxity is almost in the age group usually involved by neoplasia. In the lower eyelid, there is never the same degree of skin laxity and, with gravity working against the surgeon, direct suture of a post/resection defect is rarely an option if ectropion is to be avoided.",
"invariably present",
"Ideally, skin grafted to an eyelid defect should be as thin and flexible as normal eyelid skin, but in practice the need for mobility varies at different sites, greatest at the upper palpebral furrow, less on the lower eyelid below the tarsal plate, least over the tarsal plates - lower and upper - and the canthi. In managing postresec- tion of full postauricular skin has proved in practice to have sufficient mobility to make it entirely acceptable, with an excellent colour and texture match, and no tendency to contract secondarily. The technical aspects of its use in this site are illustrated in Figures 3.7 and 3.17.",
"defects",
"the",
"thickness",
"graft",
"The skin of the upper eyelid is made use of for reconstructive purposes in the so-called Tripier flap (Fig. 10.14). This flap, raised together with the underlying orbicularis muscle, extends across the entire width of the eyelid and is swung on its two pedicles, in the form of a 'bucket handle', to fill a lower lid defect. The secondary defect is closed directly, and this, together with the degree of skin redundancy present in the lid, determines the limit of its width. Despite its remarkable length:breadth ratio, necrosis of a Tripier flap is virtually unknown. The explanation may lie in the fact that in the age group involved the flap is extremely thin, despite its content of orbicularis muscle, and its thinness probably allows it to 'take' partly as a graft. The dusky colour which it frequently develops during its elevation and transfer can be ignored. In providing cover, it has",
"the virtues associated with upper eyelid skin used as a free skin graft.",
"With the postauricular full thickness graft and the Tripier flap both available to reconstruct lower lid defects, and each capable of giving an result, cosmetic and functional, a excellent problem of choice arises. The posterior surface of the ear is capable of providing enough skin to resurface any potential eyelid defect, and to that extent it has the greater versatility. The width of the Tripier flap is restricted by the need to be able to close the secondary defect of the upper eyelid, and this limits its potential.",
"The Tripier flap is used to provide the skin element in reconstructing full thickness defects of the lower lid where extension of the tumour has been predominantly horizontal, and it has been its effectiveness in that role which has led to its use in partial thickness defects. Within its limitations of breadth, and these can be established at the planning stage, the flap can be used for defects of the lower lid where tumour extension has been predominantly horizontal, within the extremes of medial to lateral canthus.",
"Depending on the site of the defect on the eyelid, the transferred flap may have a bridge segment. This segment tubes itself extremely rapidly, and even the segment of the flap which is inset into the defect has a marked tendency to tube itself. This is prevented by using a lightly applied tie-over dressing to positively untube it. The mild pressure which such a dressing exerts may also help the flap to attach deeply and vascularise quickly. When a bridge segment is present, division and insetting is required to complete the reconstruction, although patients often express a reluctance to have it carried out, since the intact bridge segment is barely noticeable and gives them no trouble.",
"Where the resection is near one or other canthus, and extends only as far as the centre of the eyelid, the design can be modified, to use only half of the flap, with a single pedicle.",
"Many of the tumours which involve the lower eyelid are small enough to be suitable for a Tripier flap reconstruction, particularly when they are near one or other canthus, and the flap itself is thin enough not to obscure any tumour recurring deep to it.",
"NEOPLASTIC CONDITIONS",
"Fig. 10.14 The Tripier flap,as used to provide the skin component of lower eyelid defects.",
"The flap. raised on the redundant skin usually present in the upper eyelid of the older patient, and including the underlying orbicularis muscle, is extremely versatile, capable of being used with a single pedicle to reconstruct defects near the canthi. medial or lateral, and as a 'bucket handle' bipedicled flap,to reconstruct defects of the central segment of the eyelid.",
"The Tripier ffap has a marked tendency to tube itself, andto prevent this from happening it is usual to use a light tie-over dressing to hold the flap in",
"a positively untubed position during the healing phase.",
"I 71",
"172 FUNDAMENTAL TECHNIQUES OF PLASTIC SURGERY",
"Fig. 10.15 A full thickness skin graft used to reconstruct a defect overlying the tarsal plate of the upper eyelid following excision of a basal cell carcinoma.",
"The regular sites of basal cell carcinoma, the tumour which involves the eyelids most often, are the medial canthal area and the lower lid. The upper eyelid in the skin overlying the tarsal plate is an occasional site.",
"When the tumour arises in the medial canthal area, the eyelid, upper and/or lower, becomes involved by marginal extension, and resection",
"generally leaves a surface, both in the nasal bridge and the eyelidts), which accepts a free skin graft. Resection of the entire lid thickness is only required when such a tumour is deeply invasive the the whole management of such an advanced tumour is beyond the scope of this book.",
"over",
"area,",
"and",
"When the primary site is the lower eyelid, resection leaves a defect which can vary from one of skin alone up to the full thickness of the lid. The degree of mobility of the tumour on the orbicularis muscle and tarsal plate is an excellent indicator of whether a partial thickness resection of the lid will be adequate, or whether a full thickness resection is needed. The majority of the tumours seen in clinical practice are superficial, and only require resection of skin and part thickness of orbicularis muscle, though the closer the lesion to the lid margin the more likely it is to be found that a full thickness resection is required. The presence of distortion of the lid is virtually diagnostic of the need for a full thickness excision.",
"The management of a tumour involving the upper eyelid depends very much on its site and extent. The skin laxity of the eyelid in the age in the group generally involved is maximal region of the palpebral furrow, and allows direct closure of a larger defect in that site than one might expect. The degree of laxity there also allows the skin to be advanced downwards over the tarsal plate to close a defect in that site directly. The postauricular full thickness graft also gives an excellent result when a superficial tumour overlying the tarsal plate is excised (Fig. 10.15). It is most often when the lid margin is thickness excision becomes unavoidable, and the reconstruction of such a defect is beyond the scope of this book.",
"involved that a full",
"When the extent of a lower eyelid tumour and its shape requires excision of a V-shaped wedge of by approximating the two limbs of the V. Making the V-defect involves dividing the full thickness of the eyelid-conjunctiva, tarsal plate and skin at the same level, and this is best achieved using sharp pointed scissors, rather than a scalpel, with the lid on each side of the cut supported with skin hooks (Fig. 10.16). The skin is so",
"the",
"eyelid,",
"the",
"defect",
"is",
"closed",
"Fig. 10.16 The use of sharp pointed scissors to section the eyelid.The lid margin on each side of the proposed line of cut is steadied with skin hooks.",
"mobile on the tarsal plates that cutting with a scalpel tends to result in a less tidy cut.",
"V-excision and direct suture (Fig. 10.17) is used when the V is narrow, and the landmarks of the lid margin - eyelashes, the grey line, the junction of conjunctiva and skin - are used in matching the two sides of the V. The method of suture used to close the defect is designed to avoid suture material being exposed in the conjunctival sac, since it causes irritation of the cornea where the two come into contact. The tarsal plate is closely adherent to the conjunctiva, and the two behave as a single structure, making it possible, by matching the tarsal plates, to approximate the margins of the associated conjunctiva, which then heals very rapidly. The defect can be closed in two layers, a tarso-conjunctival and a skin-muscle. Using 6-0 catgut on an atraumatic needle, the margins of the tarsal plate are approximated using inter- rupted sutures with the knot placed on the skin side. The skin and orbicularis muscle are then closed as a single layer. To use 6-0 catgut successfully in this way, tension across the tarsal plate suture line must be minimal, and this limits the width of the V which can be closed directly to a little less than one-quarter of the eyelid width. When it is apparent that tension across the suture line is likely to be unacceptable, it can be reduced by dividing the limb of the lateral canthal ligament to the eyelid, approaching it through the conjunctiva at the lateral canthus, V- excision and lateral canthotomy (Fig. 10.17).",
"NEOPlASTIC CONDITIONS I 7l",
"When tension is still too great despite this manoeuvre, a formal reconstruction of the defect becomes necessary, medially advancing the eyelid skin lateral to the defect, and the skin beyond the lateral canthal region, in the form of a transposed flap, V-excision and transposed flap (Fig. 10.17). The flap is outlined by continuing the upward curve of the eyelid margin on to the temple almost as far as the hairline, with a downward back-cut, equal in length and parallel to, the lateral limb of the V. The flap is elevated, dividing the lower limb of the canthal ligament, and the flap is transposed medially. It may be necessary in addition to divide the orbital septum and any other lid attachments deep to the skin which are felt to be limiting movement of the flap medially. There is ample slack in the conjunctiva present in the lateral fornix to be taken up as the flap is drawn medially, and provide lining for the part of the flap which is forming the reconstructed eyelid segment. The two limbs of the V are approx- imated and sutured together, and the free edge of the reconstructed eyelid segment is sutured to the conjunctiva which it has drawn medially with it. The effect of transposing the skin flap medially in this way is to leave a triangular secondary defect laterally, corresponding to the wedge initially resected from the eyelid. This is closed by rotating a small flap, outlined at the planning stage of the procedure, at the lateral extremity of the transposed flap, and giving the appearance locally of a Z. Rotation of the flap downwards to fill the lateral triangular defect completes the reconstruction.",
"triangular",
"The method works best when the defect does not extend to one or other canthus, and there is sufficient tarsal plate on each side to provide good material for suturing. It can be applied to defects which extend a little beyond half of the eyelid, and this makes it applicable to the majority of tumours whose excision can be encompassed by a V-shaped wedge.",
"NOSE",
"Considered from the point of view of tumour resection and reconstruction, the nose has an",
"174 FUNDAMENTAL TECHNIQUES OF PLASTIC SURGERY",
"/(1",
"V-excision and directsuture",
"V-excision and lateral canthotomy",
"V-excision and transposed flap",
"Fig. '0.' 7 The management of a full thickness V-excision of the eyelid.showing the changes in the methods used to allow closure of the defect to be achieved without tension as the V increases in width. The narrow V is closed by direct suture, the inset showing the two-layer closure used, with a fine absorbable suture used to approximate the margins of the tarsal plate. while avoidingany exposure of suture material in the conjunctival sac.When the tension of closing the wider V is considered to be too great. excision and lateral canthotomy is used. in which the limb of the lateral canthal ligament to the eyelid is divided. allowing the V to be closed without tension. When the V is still wider, and it is considered that canthotomy will be inadequate. tissue is advanced mediallyfrom the malar area and temple as a transposed flap, closing the secondary defect with a Z-plasty.",
"NEOPIJ\\STIC CONDITIONS 175",
"2",
"3",
"4",
"8",
"Fig. 10.18 The glabellar flap, used to reconstruct defects in the area between the bridge of the nose and the canthus, showing the two possible designs.The design selected in practice is usually determined by the estimated ease of closing the secondary defect. When closure is easy.the method shown in A is used, when it is likelyto be difficult the method shown in B is used. A The defect and the flap outlined, is shown in (I), and (2) shows the flap elevated and moved into the defect. The secondary defect is closed (3), and suturing of the flap carried out until the triangle of excess skin is delineated and excised, allowing suturing to be completed (4).",
"B The lesion, with the defect and the flap outlined, is shown in I. In 2 the flap has been raised, moved into the defect, and sutured in position.At this stage it is apparent that it will not be possible to close the glabellar defect directly.An incision is made as shown in 3, and the triangular flap which results is moved medially (4), reducing the tension of closure, and allowing suturing to be completed (5). The flap ;s usually made as broad as the distance between the eyebrows and this determines the breadth of the secondary defect, and the ease or",
"difficulty ofclosure.",
"176 FUNDAMENTAL TECHNIQUES OF PLASTIC SURGERY",
"--",
"---",
"1",
"Fig. 10.19 The finger forehead flap. used to reconstruct a midline defect of the nasal tip.",
"The flap, though midline, can be curved a little to one or other side towards its base (I), allowing it to turn more easily,and slightly extending its reach. The effect is to reduce its perfusing system to a single supraorbital-supratrochlear one, but the flap remains a safe one. The entire height of the forehead is usually required to allow the flap to reach the nasal tip.The flap is raised, initially deep to the frontalis muscle system, though often thinned over the segment to be inset to match the depth of the nasal defect, rotated downwards (2), and sutured to the margins of the defect, the forehead defect being closed directly.At the second stage, 3 weeks later. the flap is divided (3). part of the bridge segment is discarded, and the remainder is returned to the forehead (4),insetting of the transferred segment being completed. The pap is designed vertically on the forehead if at al/ possible, because the scarwhich results is much less obvious than oblique forehead scars. Since the secondary defect onthe forehead is closed directly, the permissible breadth ofthe flop is determined by the degree of laxity ofthe skin inthe midline.",
"NEOPlASTIC CONDITIONS 177",
"Fig. 10.20 The finger forehead flap used to reconstruct a defect in the medial canthal area which is beyond the reach of the standard glabellar flap.",
"Thesiteofthe defea determines the length ofthe flap which ;s required. When the flap is relatively short, the plane ofelevation cansafely be made",
"more superficial, so that its thickness will matchas accurately as possible the depth of the defect",
"outer layer of skin and a lining largely of mucous membrane, the two separated by the nasal bones and the nasal cartilages, lateral and alar. Over the bones and lateral cartilages, the normal mobility of the skin makes it a reliable clinical test of depth of tumour involvement. Over the alar cartilages the skin is fixed deeply, and the test is not reliable.",
"The degree of activity of the sebaceous glands in some patients can create problems in the use of techniques. Sebaceous activity normally increases from the bridge of the nose to the tip and, when it is marked, the thickness of the involved skin, its lack of flexibility, and its proneness to infection and bad scars, make it unsuitable as surgical material.",
"the various",
"reconstructive",
"Fig. 10.21 The glabellar advancement flap,used to reconstruct a midline defect of the upper half of the nose.",
"Closure by direct suture is only suitable for defects which are strictly limited in size, and the potential usage of the method diminishes with passage towards the nasal tip. Because of the virtually total attachment of the skin to the alar cartilage, direct suture used in that site generally results in asymmetry of the nostrils because of the distortion it produces, and the presence of",
"This reconstruction can only be used when thereis an adequate gap",
"between the eyebrows.",
"178 FUNDAMENTAL TECHNIQUES OF PlASTIC SURGERY",
"3",
"\\",
"'.",
"Fig. 10.22 The nasolabial flap, based superiorly, used to reconstruct a defect of the side of the nose.",
"In the clinical example shown, the procedure was a two-stage one, the defect and the flap being at a distance from one another. I Shows the alar defect and the flap, raised and transferred (2) to the defect. 3 Shows the appearance 2 weeks later, with the flap in position filling the defect, ready for division of the pedicle, and the scar of direct closure of the nasolabial defect. 4 Shows the line of division of the pedicle, and 5 the pedicle divided, with insetting being completed (6), and the trimmed remnant of the pedicle returned to its original site.",
"When the defect is close to the baseof the (fap it may be possible to make the transfer into a Single-stage one, but the result is often a loss of the nasolabial hollow, and the two-stage methodisgenerally preferable. The thickness of the flap, even allowing foras much thinning as is permissible while retaining flap viability, is also liable to be greater thanthe depth of the defect, and results in a contour mismatch. Removal of the underlying cartilage, lateral or alar, deepensthe defect, equating the depth of the defect to the thickness of the (fap.As shown in Figure 10.24, removal of the cartilage may also havethe virtue of making depth clearance of the tumour morecertain.",
"sebaceous activity in the area is a virtually absolute contraindication to its use. Free skin grafts have a useful,",
"if limited, reconstructive role, particularly over the nasal bones and lateral cartilages, where a deep plane of resection which leaves a readily graftable surface is easy to achieve. The full thickness postauricular graft gives an excellent cosmetic result in those sites, though when the resection has been carried to the periosteum of the nasal bone, or the periochondrium of the thinness of the graft often fails to match the depth of the defect, and a hollow results.",
"the lateral cartilage,",
"Local flaps are thicker, and are liable instead to create a bulge. They are also subject to the",
"thickness makes early problem that recognition of deep recurrence more difficult. The use of 'tumour barriers', as discussed on p. 155, can provide a solution to both problems. By removing the nasal bone and/or cartilage as part of the resection, deep clearance can be assured, and the increase in the depth of the defect makes it also able to accommodate the flap without creating a local bulge.",
"their",
"The local flaps most often used make use of the areas of the availability. The glabellar area provides the glabellar flap, the finger forehead flap, and the glabellar advancement flap, and the nasolabial area of availability provides the nasolabial flap,",
"nasolabial or",
"glabellar",
"The reconstruction of larger defects, and defects which involve the full thickness of the nose are beyond the scope of this book.",
"The glabellar flap (Fig. 10.18) is used to reconstruct defects of the side of the nose in the glabellar area. It has a limited reach, but the area is a common site of basal cell carcinoma, and it is regularly required.",
"When a defect beyond its range requires flap cover, a variant in the form of a vertical finger flap (Fig. 10.19) can be designed, still based on the glabellar area, but extending vertically upwards over the forehead. Its additional length, limited by the height of the forehead, makes it possible to reconstruct defects at a greater distance. In many patients it can reach as far as the nasal tip and, in addition to being available to resurface the nose, it can be used to reconstruct defects of the cheek close by the side of the nose within the limits of its length (Fig. 10.20). Its breadth is restricted by the need to be able to close the secondary defect directly. The transfer has generally to be carried out in two stages, the entire flap not being inset at the outset. At the second stage the pedicle is divided, insetting is completed, and the bridge segment is discarded.",
"The glabellar advancement flap (Fig. 10.21) is designed for the specific purpose of resurfacing the midline defect of the upper third of the dorsum of the nose, a problem which does not arise often, but one for which there is no easy alternative solution.",
"The nasolabial flap (Fig. 10.22) exploits the nasolabial area of availability, and it provides a versatile method for reconstructing nasal defects, predominantly of the lower third, and mainly of one or other side. The flap is usually based superiorly, occasionally inferiorly, and unless it abuts directly on the defect, the transfer requires a second stage, with division of the pedicle, and completion of insetting.",
"the intention of the surgeon may be to approach the nasal defect from a particular direction with the breadth of the flap cut to match, but it is often found that the planned approach is not the eventual approach, and if the breadth of the flap proves to be insufficient for that approach, the result",
"In planning the flap,",
"NEOPLASTIC CONDITIONS 179",
"can be disastrous. Such an embarrassment can be avoided by creating the defect as far as possible in the shape of a circle. The direction from which the flap then reaches the the than only important making it long enough, is to give it adequate width.",
"defect becomes",
"immaterial, and flap dimension, other",
"The siting of the flap in relation to the nasolabial fold is dependent on the sex of the patient, and whether the defect is in a hairless area. In the female the flap can be positioned astride the nasolabial fold, but when the defect is in a hairless area in the male, the flap has to be positioned lateral to the beard area, usually just beyond the line of the fold.",
"The superiorly based nasolabial flap is also a useful method of reconstructing the partial thickness defect of the upper lip, and here it can be designed inside the beard area when the patient is male. The flap has the considerable virtue of allowing the symmetry of the lip to be maintained.",
"EAR",
"In those parts of the pinna where the cartilage and the skin are in direct contact they are adherent to one another, the adherence greater on the lateral surface than the postauricular surface, and increasing towards the external acoustic meatus. On the postauricular surface, adherence decreases towards the postauricular sulcus. The outer surface is the area most prone to develop skin tumours, mainly actinically- induced squamous cell carcinomas, and the strength of the adherence between skin and cartilage there has a strong influence both on resection and reconstruction.",
"The usefulness of direct suture varies in the different parts of the ear. On its lateral surface, the combination of skin fixity and a concavity makes direct the conchal hollow virtually impossible. On the postauricular surface, the greater skin mobility, coupled with the fact that the ear tolerates being set back closer to the head, increases its role considerably.",
"suture of",
"a defect of",
"180 FUNDAMENTAL TECHNIQUES OF PLASTIC SURGERY",
"Fig. 10.23 Excision of a tumour of the margin of the pinna with direct closure of the defect. Closure of the defect in this way reduces the curve of the margin of the ear, but not to an unacceptable degree.",
"For the tumour arising on the margin of the pinna (Fig. 10.23), it is a simple and effective method. After clearance of the lesion, an additional narrow strip of cartilage is excised from the rim to allow the defect to be directly excising this tension. closed without additional cartilage it is important to make sure that the margin which is left passes smoothly on to the adjoining intact cartilage. Any small prominence left at the junction is liable to form a nodule which, apart from being painful on",
"In",
"occasion, can create suspicion of local recurrence. There is some loss of the curve of the margin, but the patients tend to be in the older age group, and find the result acceptable.",
"Split skin grafts are the standard grafts used in managing tumours of the outer aspect of the pinna, and in using them the 'cartilage tumour barrier' is particularly useful. The adherence of the skin deeply makes it rare to be leaving the peri- able to excise a tumour chondrium intact, with any confidence of depth",
"A",
"B",
"c",
"Fig. 10.24 The use of the cartilage tumour barrier in resecting a small squamous carcinoma. The excision of the tumour along with the underlying cartilage ensures depth clearance and also provides a graftable surface.",
"!",
"Fig. 10.25 V-excision of the pinna and direct closure.",
"clearance, while inclusion of the cartilage (Fig. 10.24) as part of the overall excision makes certain of depth clearance, and leaves an excellent bed for grafting. When there is enough cartilaginous skeleton surrounding the site to maintain the shape of the pinna, the cosmetic result is excellent, and even when the defect is near the margin, and there is some loss of the shape of the appearance remains acceptable.",
"the ear,",
"Where the tumour is small enough and in a to be excised as a full",
"site which allows it",
"NEOPLASTIC CONDITIONS 181",
"thickness V (Fig. 10.25), the defect can be closed directly in layers. A degree of distortion of the pinna usually results, but in most instances the result is cosmetically adequate.",
"The lesion whose excision will leave only a remnant of the external ear is probably best managed by total amputation of the pinna. The ear is comparatively easy to replace with a prosthesis and the cosmetic results are good (Fig. 10.1).If possible, the tragus should be preserved, as this makes the fitting of the prosthesis both easier and more cosmetically effective.",
"Hand surgery",
"HAND INJURIES",
"In discussing hand injuries consideration will be focused mainly on the methods of providing the skin cover. Although other aspects of problems they present, such as injury to tendons and nerves, or fractures and joint damage, may be equally important in the clinical situation, they are outside the scope of this book, except to the extent that their presence may influence the type of skin cover selected and the manner of its use.",
"The provision of skin cover takes priority the granulation tissue which is because produced in the process of 'healing by secondary intention' matures to fibrous tissue, and the presence of a raw surface is a potential focus of infection. Fibrosis and infection are both harmful, and together they are responsible for much of the stiffness seen as a sequel to an injury of the hand. Effective skin cover immediately eliminates infection as a significant factor and the production of granulation tissue largely ceases. Granulation tissue present prior to the provision of skin cover will obviously mature to fibrous tissue, but at least the granulation tissue already present and the scar tissue into which it will mature is not added to.",
"In a crushing injury, the situation can arise in which the damage is largely confined to the proximal hand, but tissues distal to the site of injury which are otherwise normal, or at least minimally involved, have no circulation because blood flow has been cut off by disruption of the vessels in the zone of crushing. The use of micro- vascular techniques, discussed in Chapter 4,",
"I I",
"has changed this situation from one for which nothing could be done to save the devas- cularised tissues into one where they are potentially salvageable. By the use of vein grafts which bridge the zone of damage it may be possible to restore circulation to the distal tissues. The technique has its main value in the severely crushed hand where the salvage of digits can make a very significant contribution to the ultimate function of the hand. Patients with such an injury pattern should immediately be referred to a centre where microvascular expertise is available.",
"The method of providing skin cover and the form it takes depends so much on the type of injury that an awareness of the pathological the common injury patterns is features of essential.",
"Hand injuries are of three main types - cutting and slicing, crushing and degloving and avulsion. As belongs predominantly to one type, but on occasion it combines the characteristics of crushing, and degloving and avulsion. These three types constitute distinct injury patterns but, from the viewpoint of immediate management, injuries have also been divided into tidy and untidy, a division which value, particularly as it the tourniquet.",
"a",
"rule",
"an",
"injury",
"has considerable relates to the use of",
"In the tidy injury, the damage to the skin is clear-cut, and the problems of treatment generally concern more the injury to tendons and nerves. Repair and reconstruction of these structures requires a bloodless field and for this a pneumatic tourniquet is used.",
"183",
"184 FUNDAMENTAL TECHNIQUES OF PLASTIC SURGERY",
"In the untidy injury, the initial assessment involves deciding which tissues are viable, made on the basis of whether or not the structures in question have an active circulation for which the use of an exsanguinating tourniquet is clearly inappropriate. Assessment of the viability of skin is discussed on p. 144.",
"CUTTING AND SLICING INJURIES",
"The extent of a cutting or slicing injury, at least as it involves the skin, is obvious at the outset, and the appropriate method of repair can usually be decided on the basis of the preliminary clinical examination.",
"If there has been no skin loss, the wound can be closed directly with only sufficient excision of the to remove any obviously devitalised tissue. Accurate suturing is as vital in the hand as it is in the face if rapid healing with minimal scarring is to be achieved. Skin loss is made good by free skin graft or flap. Split skin grafts are the most frequently used cover, and the small amount of tissue damage means that, if the bed exposed is suitable for grafting, good take can be expected.",
"skin edges",
"When the raw area includes a structure which is unsuitable for grafting, as when the pulp of a fingertip has been lost and replacement requires more bulk than a skin graft can provide, or a structure such as a tendon requiring subsequent repair or reconstruction is left exposed, flap cover should be provided. The restriction of tissue damage to the plane of the cut makes it often possible to proceed to immediate definitive repair of divided tendons or nerves, or to commence the reconstruction of structures lost as a result of the injury.",
"The injury resulting in a guillotine amputation of a finger which exposes bone can in theory be is grafted, but graft failure, partial or total, common. the area is allowed to heal spontaneously, the resulting scar adheres to the bone end and is prone to give trouble subsequently. A better result is often achieved by trimming the phalanx until the soft tissues will close over it without tension.",
"If",
"Although this approach may be justified when a single finger is involved, other factors come into play when the thumb is the digit partially amputated. There are then two contending considerations - the desirability of a full-length opposable thumb, and the need for good sensation and a stable tip. Hand surgery has gone through a phase where preservation of thumb other largely considerations, but it has become increasingly recognised that many patients cope perfectly adequately with less than a full-length thumb. This has made such an extreme attitude untenable, and the approach of the surgeon should be the commonsense one of assessing how vital a full-length thumb is likely to be, given the patient's work requirements, and also how long he can afford to be off work. Suffice it to say that there should be no excessive trimming of a traumatically amputated thumb to get skin cover, and free skin grafting may be legitimate as a temporary measure pending more definitive management. It is also true as a generalisation that the greater the number of digits injured the greater the need to conserve the length of individual fingers.",
"length",
"overrode",
"Injuries of this type involving the fingertip often present special problems because of the nail and its bed. Their management is discussed on p. 189.",
"CRUSHING INJURIES",
"A crushing injury can vary in severity and extent from the mildest haematoma, through the crush injury of fingers with or without bony damage, up to the power-press injury which leaves a shapeless pulp of devitalised tissue. In such an injury, loss of skin and soft tissue may not be a feature in the literal sense, but the ultimate loss is often much greater even than was immediately apparent because, in addition to the obvious devitalisation of the crushed tissues, disruption of blood vessels adds to the necrosis both of the skin and the deeper tissues. A consequence of this 'hidden' damage is unexpectedly severe oedema postoperatively, and a degree of fibrosis which is responsible for",
"subungual",
"the frequently disappointing final functional result.",
"In appraising the extent and severity of the injury, the first fact to establish is what structures are definitely not viable. With the caveat already stressed on p. 183 soft tissue structures which are considered to be non-viable should be excised quite ruthlessly. When the obviously non-viable tissue has been excised, the position can be In this second assessment, assessed afresh. decisions have to be made regarding which damaged but viable structures are worthy of retention and skin cover. The detailed decisions involved will take account of such factors as the relative importance of the fingers and the thumb, the age and work requirements of the patient, as well as the extent and severity of the damage.",
"With the exception of the thumb, where the pressures towards conservation of length carry greater weight, there are two opposing lines of argument. On one side, the more severe the damage to the individual components of a single finger - nerve, tendon, skin, bone - the stronger is the argument for amputation although the finger as a whole may be viable, because the less is the likelihood of a useful digit resulting. On the other side, the greater the damage to other fingers and the rest of the hand, the stronger is the argument for retention of the individual digit, even in the knowledge that it will be stiff. A useless finger can also be considered as a potential source of skin. Filleted, it can be used to cover a defect of adjoining dorsum or palm, avoiding the need for a graft or flap.",
"Even after scrupulous excision of non-viable structures, tissue is usually left which, although viable, is still showing crush damage. Such tissue provides a less than perfect surface for grafting than in the and take tends to be poorer comparable injury where crushing is not a factor. The crushing probably produces devitalisation of the tissues severe enough to affect adversely the vascularisation of a graft yet insufficient to devitalise them completely.",
"Compared with a cutting injury of apparently comparable severity, the crushing injury carries a much longer disability period and the end result in terms of stiffness and function generally is much poorer.",
"HAND SURGERY 185",
"DEGLOVINGAND AVULSION INJURIES",
"The distinction between degloving and avulsion injuries lies in the tissue involved.",
"Degloving is confined to the skin and fascia, the superficial fascia always, the investing layer of deep fascia usually. The important pathological factor is the disruption of the blood vessels in the degloved tissue. Toa casual inspection the damage may appear to be minor, but where there is no circulation the tissue will die. Damage to tendon, bone and joint is not part of the typical pattern.",
"Avulsion involves the deeper tissues, typically as part of a combined degloving/avulsion injury is avulsed, pulling with it the when a digit tendons inserted into it, and plucking them from their muscle bellies, and in a similar manner a length of nerve. is generally when the degloving force is considerable that it produces avulsion as well.",
"It",
"The management of such a severe mixed degloving/avulsion injury is a matter for the experienced hand surgeon, preferably one with microvascular expertise, since the avulsed digit may be potentially salvageable depending on the severity of the neurovascular disruption it has sustained. Its importance in this respect will also depend on the extent of the damage to other digits.",
"In both the dorsum and the palm the circumstances of the degloving injury often leaves the degloved flap attached distally, but the differences in the characteristics of palmar and dorsal skin are reflected in their different the behaviour degloving injury.",
"subjected to the",
"stress of",
"In the palm, the usual degloving plane is between the palmar aponeurosis and the flexor tendons, the skin and the aponeurosis, with their firm attachment to one another, behaving as a single structure. The strength and relative inextensibility of the aponeurosis also protects the circulation of the palmar skin to some extent, and the area devascularised may be less than one might expect from an early assessment.",
"In the dorsum, the plane leaves the extensor tendons exposed, though generally covered by paratenon, which provides a graftable surface unless it has been allowed to dry out.",
"186 FUNDAMENTAL TECHNIQUES OF PLASTIC SURGERY",
"The important assessment which has to be made is that of skin viability: the principle of treatment being that skin which is not demonstrably viable must be excised. The difficulty in practice lies in estimating the skin loss accurately immediately after the injury, the mistake generally made being to underestimate. If primary excision has been carried out, and at the first postoperative dressing a fresh area of it should be slough is found to be present, immediately excised and skin cover provided. In this way healing is achieved as quickly as possible. For the surgeon who feels unhappy at immediate excision of skin which appears to be minimally damaged, an alternative is delayed primary treatment, waiting for the necrotic area to declare itself before carrying out the necessary excision. This approach is valid as long as the skin excision is carried out as soon as the extent of the slough is apparent. To wait for it to separate spontaneously is not acceptable.",
"Split skin grafting of the defect is the usual form of cover used at the acute stage, and it is often satisfactory as a permanency. Even when it is considered that subsequent flap cover is likely to be needed, split skin grafting is still generally the cover of choice at the primary stage. Only if the surface exposed is one which will not take a graft, such as bare tendon, bare cortical bone or open joint, should a primary flap be considered.",
"Degloving of a single finger is a recognised injury pattern, most often involving the ring the ring becoming caught on a fixed finger, object, and degloving the digit as it is forcibly dragged off. The a phalangeal fracture, and the degloving may be complete or partial depending on whether the skin is stripped off the finger completely or remains attached over the distal phalangeal segment.",
"injury may include",
"Management of the single finger which has been degloved leaving it skeletonised, but with normal tendon and joint function, depends very the surgeon has much on whether or not microvascular expertise. The form which the degloving force takes in this injury is such that, apart from the segment at the site of the skin dehiscence, the blood vessels and nerves in the degloved tissue are liable to be undamaged. If the tissue is still attached distally it may be possible to restore the skin to its original site on the finger and revascularise it by bridging the damaged length of one or both digital arteriovenous systems with vein grafts, at the same time carrying out nerve suture. A successful result can give a virtually normal finger and is certainly worth attempting. If the necessary microvascular expertise is lacking, or the attempt fails, amputation is generally advisable.",
"Fig. 11.1 Degloving of the thumb with loss of the distal phalanx, treated initially (A) by burying the degloved digit under the chest skin. It is apparent that burial of the digit in this way (8) has not provided skin cover. Figure I 1.2 shows the method used to provide definitive skin cover.",
"HAND SURGERY 187",
"Fig. 11.2 The degloved thumb in Figure I 1.1,showing the pectoral tubed flap used to provide skin cover, followed by division of the flap and simultaneous transfer of a neurovascular island flap (see Fig. I 1.3) to provide sensation in the thumb tip. A The position of the flap on the chest. B, C The flap raised, and tubed ready to have the thumb inserted. 0, E The interval appearance of the tube, and the final result with the neurovascular island flap in position.",
"188 FUNDAMENTAL TECHNIQUES OF PLASTIC SURGERY",
"When the thumb is degloved, management is quite different. The functional value of the thumb in relation to the other digits means that every effort should be made to salvage the skeletonised component, even if it is only of part- length, or is likely to lack independent mobility. The method of temporary salvage which has been described, namely to 'bury' the degloved digit under the skin of the chest or abdomen (Fig. 11.1), may buy time but it does nothing to advance the provision of skin cover. is preferable to raise a tubed flap and insert the degloved thumb into it. There are several potential sources of such a flap. Examples are the groin flap and deltopectoral flaps, their virtues and adverse qualities discussed on p. 199 et seq., and the pedicled version of the radial forearm flap may also be a candidate. The example shown in Fig. 11.2, using the pectoral skin as a source, is a random pattern flap, but having a length:breadth ratio of approximately 1:1, is safe.",
"It",
"It has the virtue of providing thin skin, and maintenance of the position postoperatively with a sling is straightforward.",
"The thumb encased in this way has a poor blood sensation. The inadequate blood supply results in poor tip healing when the pedicle of the tubed flap is cold divided, intolerance. These, combined with an absence of sensation, result in poor usage of the thumb by the patient. Both deficiencies benefit from the incorporation of a neurovascular 'island' flap in the reconstruction (Fig. 11.3).The hemipulp of a functionally less important finger, traditionally the ulnar side of the ring or middle finger, is raised, pedicled on the digital vessels and nerve back to their origin in the palm, and tunnelled through palm and tubed flap to a functionally suitable site near the thumb tip. There it is sutured in position, and the donor pulp defect is free skin grafted. The effect is to bring both",
"supply,",
"and",
"lacks",
"and",
"leads",
"to",
"subsequent",
"Fig. 11.3 The use of a neurovascular island flap to provide sensation in a thumb resurfaced using a pectoral tubed flap.",
"sensation and blood supply to the tip of the digit, and the result is a marked improvement both in utilisation and in vascularity. Sensation is projected to the donor finger to begin with, and persists there indefinitely in most individuals. Despite this, patients adjust remarkably quickly, and do not appear to have difficulty in use.",
"techniques has created alternative methods of managing the thumb which has been degloved with partial amputation, or totally amputated. The great toe or the second toe has been transferred to replace the thumb, and the surgically degloved soft tissue component of the great toe has also been used as being less likely to result in problems with the donor foot. It has to be stressed that these techniques are not for the occasional operator, even one with some microsurgical expertise. Their effective use calls for experience and careful patient selection.",
"The use of microsurgical",
"thumb reconstruction and the results in terms of usage two conclusions emerge. First, the younger the patient the better the result; secondly, many adults who have lost a thumb from trauma manage remarkably well, and in their healed state would strongly resist any attempt to have a reconstruction inflicted on them.",
"In viewing the",
"indications",
"for",
"FINGERTIP INJURIES",
"Isolated fingertip injuries are relatively common, and the influence on treatment of the nail and pulp makes separate consideration of the injury necessary. Integrity of all three elements of the distal segment of the digit - nail, pulp and phalanx - to normality of each component, a fact which becomes apparent when the effects that damage to one component has on the others are analysed. Loss of phalangeal length results in distortion of nail growth beyond the remnant of the phalanx; loss of pulp substance results in similar distortion of nail growth beyond the phalanx, the distal nail curving round towards the pulp, sometimes with almost claw-like growth. The integrity and smoothness of the nail-bed are crucial to a smoothly growing nail. Damage or destruction,",
"is essential",
"HAND SURGERY 189",
"partial or complete, of the generative element of the nail, mainly proximal to the nail fold, makes for irregular and patchy growth, progressing with increasing severity of the damage to virtual absence of nail growth. Complete absence, however, is rare, spikes of nail continuing to grow, usually at each side of the original nail site. Once the effect of damage to the pattern of nail growth has become clinically manifest, the surgeon is largely powerless to rectify the situa- tion, all that he can do is to obliterate those areas of nail growth which are troubling the patient. This makes it desirable to prevent the deform- ities of growth from developing, although even then success is very partial.",
"An injury to the fingertip which occurs sufficiently often to constitute a distinct injury pattern is the partially avulsed fingertip which is left attached by a pedicle of pulp skin. When the injury has been of the crushing type the nail is usually avulsed from its base with the flap. The ungual process of the phalanx may be intact but denuded, or fractured, the distal fragment as part of the avulsed segment. With a cutting type of injury the nail may be cut transversely, the distal half attached to the avulsed flap.",
"It is remarkable how small the pedicle need be to ensure survival of the partially avulsed flap, and a decision as to viability should only be made when the flap has been restored to its original position to eliminate the adverse effect of torsion and angulation of the pedicle on the blood supply of the flap. If it is not viable, treatment is as for a guillotine amputation, but with a viable flap the fingertip should be reconstituted after minimal excision of wound edges and pulp fat. The nail should be retained and replaced in its bed to provide splintage and help to ensure a smooth nail-bed after healing. In this way the likelihood of distortion when the fresh nail grows in is reduced. When the nail has been transected care should be taken to get the edges of the nail, and hence its bed, accurately apposed for the same reason.",
"When the fingertip injury has resulted in tissue loss it will involve damage to the pulp with its skin, the phalanx, the nail and its bed, in varying degree. The appropriate reconstruction, whether by shortening of the digit, free skin graft",
"190 FUNDAMENTAL TECHNIQUES OF PLASTIC SURGERY",
"or flap, depends at least partly on the extent of the damage to each constituent. In the extreme case the choice may be clear-cut; it is in the mixed injury that difficulty arises.",
"Severe crushing which devitalises the nail and phalanx while the pulp is still viable is best treated by amputating the devitalised segment and closing the defect with a flap of the pulp skin. For the slicing injury which removes either pulp skin or distal nail without significantly damaging pulp or phalanx, the obvious measure is a free skin graft, while the more severe injury where there is loss of pulp substance requires a flap to restore the volume lost, and preserve normality of nail growth. The majority of injuries lie between these extremes, however, with loss of pulp and sometimes of bone, and management is less clear-cut.",
"The fingertip is one of the very few sites where a full thickness skin graft has been successfully used in primary trauma, but it has no real advantage over a thick split skin graft, the all-important need in grafting being for good take. The common cause of graft failure in this situation is haematoma and in fact haemostasis in a fingertip injury is not always easy to achieve. There is much to be said for delayed grafting, postponing application for 24 hours to allow for natural haemostasis. It is not even essential to suture the graft in position with a tie-over dressing. Micropore tape can be used most effectively to hold the graft in position. Indeed, tape has a most useful role in minor hand injuries generally, particularly in children where it can sometimes obviate the need for an anaesthetic of any kind. The suitability of a fingertip defect for grafting can be judged by comparing the area of bare exposed bone with the area of soft tissue: the greater the soft tissue the more suitable for grafting, the greater the area of bone the less suitable for grafting.",
"techniques involving the use of flaps have been described for providing cover fingertip injuries, ranging from shortening of the digit to allow creation of a flap of flexor surface skin to close the defect, through local flaps advanced to provide skin cover, to pedicled flaps from sites in the vicinity, transferred to the defect. Each has its",
"Skin grafting apart, various",
"for",
"protagonists, but the fact that none has universal the acceptance indicates the complexity of problem, and the fact that each technique has imperfections. Some are described on P: 205 et seq. The essential primary aims in managing a fingertip injury are rapid healing, with a pain-free scar and a sensate pulp, and the use of complex reconstructions to achieve desirable as opposed to essential aims increases the possibility of failure to achieve either.",
"of",
"the methods",
"In practice, many fingertip injuries are is allowed to heal remarkable how well most of them do. This applies most of all to children, where the defect in any case is a small one and there is no fear of a tender scar. Indeed, this fact should make the surgeon chary about carrying out elaborate procedures at all in children with fingertip injuries. It is astonishing too how, with growth, the scar of a fingertip injury, left untreated in the young child, in size, and similar shrinks shrinkage of a split skin graft takes place.",
"spontaneously, and it",
"TECHNIQUES OF REPAIRAND RECONSTRUCTION",
"The skin of the palm is widely believed to be more rigid than skin in most other body sites, but its rigidity is largely determined by the degree of callosity which is present, and this depends on whether or not the individual is a manual worker. Even when the skin is soft and without any suggestion of callosity, an illusion of rigidity is created by its limited amount of mobility. The limitation is largely due to the pattern of flexure line 'creases' on the palm and the digits. Along these lines the skin is fixed deeply, to the palmar fascia in the palm, and to the fibrous flexor sheaths in the digits, the cushion of fibro-fatty pads which separate them elsewhere being absent. The effect of this deep fixation of the skin along the flexion creases is to limit areas between, particularly where the distance between two creases is short, as between the proximal and distal palmar creases. It also largely restricts the width of the defect which can be closed directly",
"its mobility in the",
"to the small amount of laxity present between adjacent creases.",
"Along the medial and lateral margins of the palm and the the characteristics of palmar skin without taking on those of dorsal skin. Lacking hair follicles, but without the 'fingerprint' pattern of papillary ridges, it provides a 'neutral line' between the palmar remaining unwrinkled both when the digit is flexed and extended. In the two proximal digital segments the skin is also tethered to the sides of the phalangeal shafts by Cleland's ligaments.",
"digits",
"the",
"skin loses",
"and",
"dorsal",
"surfaces,",
"On the dorsal surface the skin is flexible, and moves freely over the extensor tendons. A degree of skin laxity is indicated by the fine pattern of transverse wrinkle lines which is present over almost its entire surface, disappearing when the fingers are flexed. Overlying the site each proximal interphalangeal joint in the there is a localised area of skin redundancy, with a pattern of coarse transverse in outline but becoming circular WIth flattemng of the wrinkling as the redundancy is taken up when the finger flexes. A similar redundancy IS present over the interphalangeal joint of the thumb.",
"SUTURING TECHNIQUES",
"The skin of the palm is unusual in the way it reacts to suture materials. When many of the standard suture materials are used epithelium tends immediately to grow along the track of the suture, and removal of the suture, even relatively soon after insertion, leaves a cone-shaped keratin plug like a comedo in the path of suture',This can give rise to discomfort amounting to pam on local pressure, with slight reddening around.the site and the condition is slow to subside, Different materials vary in their proneness to this complication, nylon being among the less",
"The hand is a site where catgut used as a skin suture has a place. Epithelial down-growth and keratin plug formation do not appear to occur and when it is used to suture wounds and for tie-over bolus dressings, it dissolves spontaneously is a valuable attribute in",
"the fact",
"that",
"HANDSURGERY 191",
"managing grafts and wounds particularly when the patient is a child.",
"PLACING SCARS",
"Incisions which cross palmar and digital creases at right angles should be avoided (Fig. 11.4). as contraction of the scar is liable to cause a flexion contracture. The principle also applies to a graft, to the extent that its margin should not run in an unbroken line across a crease, the marginal scar being liable to contract, particularly if there is failure of take at its margin for even a millimetre or two. It is well established that incisions which result in scars running lengthwise along the middle of the palmar aspect of a finger are contraindicated because of the contracture which almost inevitably results.",
"In the finger,",
"the lateral line is neutral as ar.e If",
"regards skin tension, and scars in not subject to contractural problems. grafts and flaps are carried round on to .the of the finger to bring the marginal scar into this neutral line, a minor contracture of the scar becomes of little consequence.",
"These rules of scar placement, as they relate to the use of the neutral line and crossing the skin creases at right angles, are undoubtedly valid, but the latter particularly represents an extreme situation, are that unnecessarily restrictive. Incision lines which cross the line of the flexion creases at more acute angles, or at the neutral line, have been found in practice to be acceptable, and between tl:e flexion creases incisions can be allowed to run in virtually any direction. Examples of which illustrate this approach, and which are frequently used, are shown in Figure 11.5. The scars which follow a properly designed Z-plasty also provide an example of these less restrictive practices.",
"and",
"in",
"respect",
"they",
"USE OFTHE Z-PLASTY",
"The Z-plasty can be used to a .c?n- tracture from developing when a linear mCISIon",
"192 FUNDAMENTAL TECHNIQUES OF PLASTIC SURGERY",
"Fig. 11.4 Commonly used skin incisions in the hand (A). These may be combined or modified if necessary.with the proviso that the blood supply ofany(lap raised must be adequate for its survival.",
"Skin incisions. extending existing wounds (8). suitable to permit exploration. and repair if necessary.of nerves and tendons.",
"HAND SURGERY 193",
"Skin incisions. as described by Littler (A). and by Bruner (B). Although these incisions do not follow the restrictive dicta",
"Fig. 11.5 illustrated in Figure 11.4.they are entirely acceptable.The lateral line. with an absence of skin wrinkling. is neutral for skin tension.",
"running proximo-distally over the distal palm and the digit has been necessary to provide in Dupuytren's adequate surgical exposure, contracture for example, as discussed below, or to correct the linear contracted scar resulting from the use of such an incision, closed directly without incorporating a Z-plasty. The technique is most effective when the contracture is linear, well defined and narrow. It is unsuitable for the diffuse, broad contracture, for example post- burn, the importation of skin using a flap or graft being required.",
"segment can be used. This is certainly the largest Z which should be used, and a smaller one may be preferable. Each Z-plasty can be designed individually if desired; more often they are planned as a continuous multiple Z-plasty. The standard 60\u00b0 Z-plasty is used routinely with the modified flap shape as shown in Figure 2.6 to broaden the tip of each flap. It is possible to make the multiple Zs skew or symmetrical, but unless the presence of previous scarring makes the skew design essential the symmetrical design is to be preferred.",
"Where the contracture crosses more than one skin crease, a multiple Z-plasty is generally required, with a Z to correspond to each crease. As explained in Chapter 2, the lengthening which occurs with each Z is accompanied by transverse shortening, and in the hand the amount of transverse slack available is extremely limited. A good working rule is that a Z-plasty of a size which would fit into the adjoining phalangeal",
"The lines for elective scars in the hand have already been discussed, and the desirability of avoiding unnecessary crossing of a flexion crease. The Z-plasties should therefore be designed wherever possible so that, when completed, each transverse limb lies in a flexion crease.",
"To achieve this, the Z-plasty has to be planned formally, and drawn out on the skin (Fig. 11.6).",
"194 FUNDAMENTAL TECHNIQUES OF PLASTIC SURGERY",
"A",
"B",
"c",
"D",
"E",
"Fig. 11.6 Siting the Z-plasty in the hand to ensure that the transverse limb of the completed Z-plasty lies along a skin crease. A The scar crossing the line of the metacarpophalangeal skin crease and producing contractural flexion of the joint. B The triangles constructed on each side of the scar with the intended transverse limb along the metacarpophalangeal skin crease. C, 0 The Z-plasty flaps selected. the skin incisions made, the flaps raised and transposed. E The transposed flaps sutured in position with the transverse limb lying along the skin crease as planned.",
"Although the triangles on each side of the contracted scar areequilateral, contraaural scars in practice are frequently under tension, and release of the tension when the Z-plasty flaps areraised allows the scarred skin to shorten a little. For this reason it maybe appropriate for the limbs of a Z-plasty which are portof a contracted scar to be corsuuaed a little longer thanthe limbs which are not similarly stressed, the limbs becoming equal in length when the contracture is released.",
"The line of each flexion crease is marked as a first step. The key to successful planning of the actual Z-plasty incisions is to ensure that each lateral incision is made to end on the line of the flexion crease. Transposition of the flaps will then automatically leave the transverse limb lying along the crease.",
"In practice, with the line of the crease marked out on the skin, an equilateral triangle can be drawn on each side of the scar into which the Z- plasty is being inserted so that the apex of each triangle is on the crease already marked. Of the two possible pairs of 60\u00b0 Z-plasty flaps outlined in this way, the appropriate one can be chosen in the knowledge that, since each incision ends on the crease, completion of the procedure will leave the transverse limb lying along the crease.",
"A multiple Z-plasty used in the hand leaves a redundancy of skin in passing from one Z to the next. There is a temptation to trim this for greater neatness but it should be resisted. Skin is never available to excess in the palmar aspect of the hand and, if the Zs have been planned as described, the apparent excess will have developed in the middle of a phalangeal segment between the skin creases. There is a natural fullness in this part of a normal finger",
"in any case,",
"and the redundancy settles rapidly to a normal and natural-looking bulkiness.",
"As already indicated, the Z-plasty can also be effectively used in Dupuytren's contracture. With conservative fasciectomy now largely standard, its virtues have become increasingly obvious. The contracture often presents as a linear contracture, sometimes confined to the finger or palm, sometimes extending over both. incision provides The linear proximo-distal excellent the fascia, the access incorporation of a continuous multiple Z-plasty at the same time acts prophylactically to prevent any tendency to subsequent scar contraction is markedly (Fig. 11.7). When the contracted, incision alone should be made in the first instance. Once the fasciectomy has been carried out and the finger is straight, or near straight, it becomes an easy matter to construct the Z-plasty flaps. A problem which can arise",
"to",
"and",
"finger the proximo-distal",
"in severe Dupuytren's contracture is the difficulty of fascia without excising contracted 'buttonholing' the skin on one or other side of the initial longitudinal incision. By waiting until the fasciectomy is complete before designing the Z flaps it is usually possible, if the skin has been",
"the",
"HAND SURGERY 195",
"1",
"c",
"1-'1:.\"",
"f I - v",
"o",
"E",
"Fig. 11.7 The use of a continuous multiple Z-plasty in carrying out a fasciectomy for Dupuytren's contracture involvinga single ray. A The line of the skin incision, extending over the length of the contracted fascia, with the intended line of the transverse limb of each",
"Z-plasty element in the line of a skin crease.",
"B The multiple Z-plasty drawn out on the skin to place each transverse limb of the completed Z-plasty in the skin crease, using the method",
"shown in Figure I 1.6.",
"C The exposure provided by the longitudinal skin incision. o The fasciectomy completed and the Z-plasty flaps CUt. E The Z-plasty flaps in their transposed position, with each transverse limb in a skin crease. F The completed procedure, with the skin sutured.",
"buttonholed, to make the 'hole' part of the inci- sion used in designing the Z-plasty flaps without compromising their circulation. The effect may be to leave the transverse limb in a less than ideal line, but in the circumstances this is acceptable.",
"The method can also be used when the contracture involves more than one ray (Fig. 11.8). The palmar involvement is approached",
"with the standard transverse skin incision, and the contractural element in each digit is exposed using the incision already described, its proximal extent brought close to the transverse palmar incision but not becoming continuous with it. The exposure which this combination provides is exemplary and, with the fasciectomy carried out, the Z-plasties in each",
"proximo-distal",
"196 FUNDAMENTAL TECHNIQUES OF PLASTIC SURGERY",
"B",
"c",
"Fig. 11.8 The use of multiple Z-plasties, in combination with the open palm technique. in carrying out a fasciectomy in Dupuytren's contracture involvingtwo rays. A The skin incisions drawn on the skin. with the longitudinal incisions stopping short of the transverse palmar incision. B The fasciectomy completed. and the Z-plasty incisions. C The Z-plasty flaps transposed. o Suturing of the Z-plasties completed, with the transverse palmar incision left to heal spontaneously.",
"finger can be completed. Depending on the usual practice of the surgeon, the transverse palmar incision can either be closed or left unsutured, as in the McCash open palm method. This approach lends itself particularly well to the latter.",
"The problem of deepening the web (Fig. 11.9) can also sometimes be solved by the use of the",
"Z-plasty. If the web is looked upon as a line of contracture, a Z-plasty can be designed with a dorsal and a palmar flap. Transposition of the flaps has the effect of lengthening the web and in the process deepening it. The method works best where the web is reasonably wide, allowing flaps of a suitable size to be used.",
"HAND SURGERY 197",
"2",
"r,",
",,\\,..",
"5",
"Fig. 11.9 The Z-plasty,used to deepen the web between the thumb and index finger to increase the grasp of a thumb short as a result of trauma.",
"USE OF FREE SKIN GRAFTS",
"The individual behavioural characteristics of the split skin graft and the full thickness skin graft determine their usage in the different sites and the differing circumstances which arise in providing skin cover.",
"The characteristics which are relevant are that a split skin graft takes more readily in clinical",
"situations where there are adverse factors, but it contracts secondarily if circumstances permit. The full thickness skin graft requires optimum conditions for successful taker but it does not contract secondarily.",
"When the skin loss is post-traumatic, the all- important requirement is good graft taker and the graft of choice is therefore a split skin graftr even though the surgeon is aware that it will",
"198 FUNDAMENTAL TECHNIQUES OF PlASTIC SURGERY",
"probably be necessary to replace it subsequently with a full thickness skin graft if contracture becomes a problem. Where the defect has been surgically created, conditions for take can be assumed to be ideal, and the choice of graft type is then determined by how essential it is that the graft should not contract secondarily.",
"The grafts used for permanent cover on the dorsum and in the palm differ because of the differences in their subsequent behaviour in the two sites. The degree of laxity of the skin of the dorsum of the hand and the fingers, coupled with its mobility, allows it to tolerate a degree of graft contraction, though the use of a moderately thick split skin graft, in which the tendency to contract is minor, is still preferable.",
"A further factor in selection concerns the comparative power of the long extensors and flexors in the hand, and whether or not that power is able to overcome the innate tendency of split skin grafts to contract secondarily. The tendency of split skin grafts to contract second- arily is a temporary phenomenon and, in clinical",
"situations where contraction can be prevented for a prolonged period, the tendency is finally and permanently overcome. The flexor group of muscles appear to be powerful enough to act in this way and prevent significant late contraction. For these reasons the split skin graft can safely be used on the dorsum of the hand and fingers. In the palm the less powerful extensors are unable to prevent late graft contraction and, as a result, full thickness skin grafts are used to resurface palmar defects. In the webs also, where secondary contraction would have adverse effects, a full thickness skin graft is preferable.",
"Split skin grafts settle remarkably well on the dorsum, both of the hand and the fingers, generally developing a pattern of creases to match the surrounding skin, and weathering to it virtually an indistinguishable from the surrounding skin, particularly if it has proved possible to leave the dorsal pattern of veins intact.",
"appearance which makes",
"Free skin grafts applied to sites on the tactile surfaces which are used in heavy work have a",
"Fig. 11.10 The sites from which small split skin grafts of glabrous skin can be harvested.",
"subsequent tendency to fissure. This dis- advantage can be overcome by using one of the glabrous skin donor sites which more nearly match the skin of the palm. The available sites (Fig. 11.10) are limited in area, but where a small graft only is required, excellent quality split skin can be obtained from the ulnar margin of the hand, extending forward from the neutral line, between the distal palmar crease and the wrist crease. The non-weightbearing instep area of the sole of the foot has similar skin, and is capable of providing a greater although still limited amount of skin. Both donor sites heal quickly, and seem to give no problems such as tender scars.",
"A late problem which may arise following the use of a graft, whether full thickness or split skin, is the development of a line of contraction along the margin of the graft, by a process akin to that which causes scar contraction. The severity of the resulting contracture depends on the site and how rapidly healing at the margin of the graft has taken place. It is not always possible to avoid such contraction but its more severe effects can at least be mitigated by placing the margins of the graft along one of the elective incision lines already described (p. 191). The bringing of the graft margin to such a line may of course mean carrying the graft beyond the obvious defect, if need be excising normal skin to do so. If this is felt to be undesirable, an alternative may be to break the line of any contracture which subsequently develops with a Z-plasty.",
"The method of applying and suturing the graft is similar to that described for general use. When applying the tie-over bolus and the subsequent pressure dressing, care should be taken to avoid undue pressure on the graft. It is the graft on the dorsum of the fingers and hand which is specifically at risk, and the most vulnerable areas are the prominences caused by the heads of the metacarpals and the proximal phalanges. Failure of is particularly in these areas undesirable, exposure of extensor tendon and joint capsule being a likely result. Marked flexion of the fingers accentuates these prominences, and the hand is best immobilised on the extended side of the position of function.",
"the graft",
"The application of the dressing is discussed",
"later under the heading of Postoperative Care.",
"HANDSURGERY 199",
"USE OF FLAPS",
"The flaps used in the hand are either pedicled or free, and at the outset of any discussion on the pros and cons of their use it has to be recognised that unless the surgeon has the expertise to transfer a free flap, and the necessary facilities, he is restricted to using pedicled flaps.",
"Pedicled flaps The pedicled flaps used in reconstructing hand defects are either local or distant.",
"The majority of local flaps used in practice were designed to cope with specific problems, most often involving either the palmar aspect of digits which were unsuitable for grafting, or the distal phalangeal segment with loss of pulp or part of the nail bed, and they do not have a wider clinical usage. Others make use of the skin of the dorsum of the hand, the deep fixation and physical characteristics of palmar skin making it unsuitable for use as a flap. The only site on the hand which can provide even a modestly sized transposed or rotation type of flap is the area between the wrist and the webs, and as a result the defect which it can cover is a small one.",
"Distant flaps can be of the direct or tubed axial pattern type (p. 78), or as a pedicled variant of the radial in which the part of its perfusing arteriovenous system distal to the flap is retained as its pedicle. A further flap, the posterior interosseous (p. 201), which uses the same principle, pedicled on the posterior interosseous arteriovenous system, has also been described. All of these flaps are capable of being used primarily, and can consequently be used in acute trauma.",
"forearm flap,",
"In the case of the direct flap the very short pedicle reduces the margin for error very greatly, and the transfer has to be planned with conside- rable care. It also requires immobilisation of the involved part of the hand and arm for a minimum of 3 weeks, and this is liable to create problems of stiffness not merely of the fingers but also of the elbow and shoulder, particularly in the older age group. In the past, because of the absence of alternatives, it had a significant role in acute major hand trauma. With the alternatives currently available its role has markedly diminished.",
"200 FUNDAMENTAL TECHNIQUES OF PLASTIC SURGERY",
"A",
"Fig. 11.11 The groin flap.used to resurface a defect of the ulnar side of the hand. A The defect of the hand and the groin flap outlined. B The groin flap raised and transferred. with the secondary defect closed directly.",
"The tubed axial pattern flap has the advantage of the latitude which its long pedicle permits. Its favourable length:breadth ratio also reduces careful positional somewhat planning and fixation.",
"the need for",
"The flap most often used is the groin flap (Fig. 11.11), and the hypogastric flap is an alternative. With either flap the position is a comfortable one for the patient, but both sites can be undesirably fat, the hypogastrium more so than the flank, and this might influence the surgeon in his choice. The hypogastric flap also transfers skin which is often hairy while the groin flap uses skin which is usually free of hair even in the most hirsute. The secondary defect of the groin flap is less conspicuous, and it can usually be closed by direct suture. Both flaps involve a degree of dependency of the hand and, as a",
"Fig. 11.12 The use of the deltopectoral flap. showing the way in which the site of the flap helps to maintain the hand in an elevated position.",
"result, carry a potential for postoperative oedema. The severity of the problem largely depends on the degree to which the type of the injury and its early institution of a full regimen of active exercises. Oedema has proved to be less of a problem when the flap is used in secondary reconstruction, and active exercises can be instituted from the outset. The deltopectoral flap (Fig. 11.12) is also capable of providing a considerable area of thin flexible It maintains the hand in an elevated skin. position, and on that basis might be expected to counter the development of oedema. In practice, the ease with which the hand can be brought to the chest and maintained there depends on the physical characteristics of the patient, easy when the patient is thin, difficult in the case of the short, broad-chested individual. This is an aspect easily tested, and would be part of the selection process. The role of the deltopectoral flap has historically been in head and neck surgery, but for the hand surgeon restricted to the use of pedicled flaps it is worthy of consideration.",
"extent preclude the",
"The skin transferred in the pedicled version of the radial forearm flap has similar characteristics to those of its parent free flap. To have a vascular pedicle long enough to permit transfer to a hand defect, the flap has to be sited in the proximal forearm, with a skin incision made from the distal border of the flap in the direction of the the vessels wrist forming the pedicle. Depending on the site of the defect the distal extent of the vascular pedicle may be in virtual continuity with it; if it is not, the forearm incision is extended to bring it into continuity with the defect. A key element in the safety of the flap lies in ensuring that the pedicle is of adequate length, and is not subjected to external pressure.",
"to allow mobilisation of",
"Posterior interosseous flap The posterior interosseous flap (Fig. 11.13) is sited a little above the middle of the forearm on its extensor aspect, and is based on the posterior interosseous artery and its accompanying veins. The vessels emerge proximally from under supinator into the intermuscular septum lying between extensor carpi ulnaris and extensor",
"HANDSURGERY 101",
"minimi digiti and pass distally in the septum, reaching the dorsal carpal vascular arch, and anastomosing with the anterior interosseous vessels at the level of the wrist. Branches are given to the adjacent muscles and the ulna, and also to the investing layer of deep fascia, through it perfusing the overlying skin. In the process of elevating the flap the vessels proximal to it are divided, and blood flow becomes retrograde with reliance on the dorsal carpal arch and the anastomosis with the anterior interosseous vessels, the site of which provides the pivot point of the flap.",
"In planning the transfer of the flap, the surface marking of the septum, a line joining the lateral epicondyle of the humerus and the head of the ulna with the arm fully pronated, is drawn on the skin, and the flap is outlined as an ellipse positioned with its axis proximo-distal and its centre approximately 9 em from the lateral epicondyle. The flap is designed with its long axis proximo-distal. Its width is limited by the desirability of closing the defect directly, 5 em being an approximate maximum though, with the defect consisting of muscle belly, split skin grafting should present no problems.",
"The margin of the flap and the line of the septum distal to it are incised, and the musculo- tendinous structures are dissected free from each side of the septum with its vessel content. Dissection is carried out from distal to proximal because the structures involved are superficial in the distal forearm and easier to identify, in contrast to the situation proximally where the vessels lie deeply, hidden between the two muscle bellies. With an artery whose external diameter is approximately 1.7mm, and branches which the correspondingly dissection involved is a delicate one, and cannot be hurried.",
"are",
"smaller,",
"The relative shortness of the vascular pedicle restricts its use mainly to defects of the dorsum of the hand. On the palmar aspect it cannot reach much beyond the wrist. For defects of these sites it provides thin skin of excellent quality. It has the further virtue of not requiring the sacrifice of a major perfusing source for the hand, a factor which may be relevant in a mutilating injury.",
"202 FUNDAMENTAL TECHNIQUES OF PlASTICSURGERY",
"Extensor digitorum",
"Extensor carpi ulnaris",
"Extensorminimi digiti",
"Extensordigitorum",
"Fig. I 1.13 The posterior interosseous flap.The line of emergence of the perforating vessels which perfuse the flap, and the line of dissection in mobilising its vascular pedicle. lies between extensor carpi ulnaris and extensor minimi digiti. The distinction between the two is greater distally, and it is there that the dissection to separate them is begun.",
"Free flaps In free flap selection, desirable attributes are that the skin which it provides should be adequate in thin and flexible. There is obvious area, advantage in having the donor site in the same arm, thus confining dressing to a single limb, and making for easy mobilisation both of the patient and his hand.",
"The flaps which fall into this category are the radial forearm (p, 111) and lateral upper arm (p. 114). Of the two, transfer of the radial forearm flap is technically easier, and is generally more popular. As discussed on p. 114,the ulnar forearm flap is a potential alternative, used both as a free flap, and pedicled distally.",
"Before either of the forearm flaps is used, the effect of the injury on the various perfusion sources of the hand must be assessed with care,",
"since the process of transfer involves division of one of the two major axial arteries in the proximal forearm.",
"PREPARATION OFTHE DEFECT",
"In preparing the defect, its margin should always be excised to healthy tissue, and this applies with equal force to a granulating area. Only with adequate marginal excision, removing any spread epithelium, can the flap be soundly sutured to good surgical material. As has been pointed out in relation both to scars and free skin grafts in the hand, and for the same reasons, ideally the margin between a flap and the hand is best placed along one of the elective lines for scars. This may involve bringing the flap beyond",
"HANDSURGERY 203",
"the obvious defect and, if the excision required is small, is worth doing.",
"When a flap is being transferred as a preliminary to a reconstructive procedure, e.g. of tendon, it may be advisable to have the transfer complete and the area healed before treatment of the deep structure is begun, particularly if sepsis is seen as a potential hazard.",
"DEFECTS PROXIMAL TOTHEWEBS",
"If a defect of the dorsum is small, a rotation or transposed flap is occasionally a possible method of repair (Fig. 11.14). Planning has to be careful, since the amount of 'slack' available is deceptively small, and free skin grafting of the secondary defect is almost always needed. In practice, cases suitable for such a local flap seldom occur. Its use in the older age group is generally unwise. Ageing, atrophic skin makes poor surgical material, and is apt to necrose.",
"When a distant flap is required, the decision regarding the appropriate source depends very much on the size of the defect. For the defect of intermediate size near the radial or ulnar side a flap from the opposite forearm is a direct possibility (Fig. 11.15). A very real factor in limiting the value of such a cross-arm flap concerns the fact that the patient will be unable to look after his toilet requirements. The upper arm is also a potential source, used in correction of the adduction contracture of the first web by filling the gap created when the contracture has been opened up (Fig. 11.16). The hand with the web opened fits particularly well around the upper arm, and the position is a comfortable one for the patient.",
"the is more extensive, facilities available and the expertise of the surgeon are likely to determine whether a free transfer such as a radial forearm flap or one of the pedicled transfers already described is chosen.",
"When the defect",
"Fig. 11.14 A transposed flap, used to provide skin cover for a localised deeply penetrating ulcer of the dorsum of the hand.",
"10<4 FUNDAMENTAL TECHNIQUES OF PlASTIC SURGERY",
"1",
".d17",
"Fig. 11.1 S The use of a cross-arm flap in repairing an injury of the thenar eminence. The injury,involving the metacarpophalangeal joint, prepared (I) to receive the flap after excision of all damaged tissue, and in position to receive the flap,outlined on the forearm (2), and raised (3).The split skin graft applied to the secondary defect is extended to line the bridge segment of the flap (4), with plaster of Paris fixation of the arms (5).6 shows the flap at 3 weeks, immediately prior to division,and 7 the flap divided with insetting completed.",
"Fig. 11.16 Cross-arm flap raised on the upper arm, used in correction of a first web contracture, showing how the hand fits round the upper arm, helping to maintain the correction of the contracture while the flap is attaching to the defect.",
"DEFECTS DISTAL TOTHEWEBS",
"The defect may be of one finger only or of several fingers and according to circumstances a local flap from the same or an adjoining finger, or a distant flap from the arm or trunk, may be used for cover. The first choice should generally be a local flap, but its use implies a localised defect. It is when the defect is more extensive or involves more than one finger that the larger area of tissue a distant flap provides is unavoidable.",
"Distant flaps Because of their size, most distant flaps are involving a unsuited for the average defect single digit. It is in managing defects which involve several digits that they can be of value.",
"HANDSURGERY 205",
"When it the small is possible to convert individual defects into a single larger defect by suturing the adjacent margins of each defect together, creating a temporary syndactyly, it can become a candidate for a single distant flap (Fig. 11.17).",
"such a reconstruction provides certain problems once the flap has been successfully transferred, relating to the management of the syndactyly. If a pedicled flap has been used, it is probably best to divide the pedicle before dividing the syndactyly, to allow mobilisation of the fingers. It is when the fingers come to be separated that difficulties arise because of the thickness of the flap, as demonstrated in Figure 11.18. The simplest solution is to remove the flap in its entirety, and split skin graft the raw surface on each digit. In contrast to the surface exposed at the time of the injury, which would not have accepted a graft, the coverage provided by the flap creates a surface which, when the flap is removed, can be grafted without difficulty.",
"The subsequent management of",
"Local flaps Local flaps have their greatest value in managing defects on the flexor aspect of the fingers which are unsuitable for grafting, often because they extend deeply to expose the flexor tendons, and in managing certain guillotine amputations of the distal phalangeal segment.",
"Cross-ftnger flaps These flaps are raised on the dorsal aspect of a finger, most often to provide cover for a defect of the palmar aspect, occasionally the tip, of a nearby digit. The defect of the flexor aspect considered suitable for the technique usually involves the middle and/or proximal phalangeal segments. the length:breadth ratio of the flap to an undesirable extent, while the technical difficulties of the transfer increase if the area to be covered is much longer than this.",
"Shorter",
"defects",
"increase",
"The flap is side-based in most instances (Fig. 11.19), though a distal pedicle is generally required in the rare instances when the flap is used in order to preserve the length of a finger, as in Figure 11.20. In designing such a distally",
"206 FUNDAMENTAL TECHNIQUES OF PLASTIC SURGERY",
"Fig. 11.17 The conversion of an injury involvingseveral fingers into a single defect to facilitate the provision of flap cover. The injuries of both hands (A), consisting of full thickness skin loss burns of the dorsal aspects of several fingers. with damage to the underlying extensor expansion, were converted (8) in each into a single defect and covered with a groin flap.",
"The subsequent management af this patient is shown in Figure / /./8.",
"based flap, it is important to avoid encroaching on the nail bed of the donor finger. The index finger is the one which is most likely to sustain an injury suitable for this particular flap.",
"When the defect is of the thumb, the fact that its distal phalangeal segment lies alongside the proximal segment of the index finger means that the the reconstruction can extend well on to the distal segment of the digit. The patient may also find the position more comfortable with the middle rather than the index finger used as the donor digit (Fig. 11.21), and a preoperative trial should be carried out to test this before proceeding to design the transfer.",
"site of",
"the defect",
"suitable",
"for",
"The flap must be raised to leave the extensor expansion of the donor finger covered with paratenon, and in the case of the side-based design to avoid baring the digital nerve and artery. The secondary defect on the donor finger is covered with a graft of either thick split skin or full thickness skin, extended to line the bridge segment of the flap, using a bolus tie-over dressing.",
"The reach of a side-based cross-finger flap can be increased if a point is made of dividing Cleland's skin ligaments (Fig. 11.19 C,D). These in this surgical ligaments, as they appear procedure, combine to form a fibrous septum just dorsal to the neurovascular bundle, and they",
"HANDSURGERY 107",
"Fig. I 1.18 The subsequent management of the injured digits shown in Figure I 1.17, using the 'crane' principle. A The groin flaps divided at 3 weeks following application, to allow full mobilisation of the hand. elbow and shoulder as early as possible.",
"leaving the temporary syndactyly.",
"B The surfaces left following excision of the flap from each hand, ready for split skin grafting. C The end result following split skin grafting.",
"The concept of using a flap to provide temporary cover for a defect in order to convert a surface, initially unsuitable for grafting because of tissue",
"damage, into one suitable for grafting by making use of the reparative capacity of the vascular content of the (lap, as in the patient illustrated, is referred to as the'crane' principle.",
"208 FUNDAMENTAL TECHNIQUES OF PLASTIC SURGERY",
"Fig. 11.19 Cross-finger flap used to resurface the pulp of the thumb.",
"The injury of the pulp (A). and the defect prepared to receive the flap (8). The flap.laterally based. raised and turned back. before dividing Cleland's ligaments (C). and after dividingthe ligaments (0) to provide the flap with additional reach. The flap is sutured to the defect (E). and the split skin graft applied to the secondary defect (F). ready for the tie-over bolus to be applied. with the final result (0). following division and insetting of the flap.",
"HAND SURGERY 209",
"Fig. I 1.20 A distally based cross-finger flap used to cover a guillotine injury of the index fingertip.",
"The injury (A). and the distally based flap (8) raised on the dorsum of the middle finger.The flap sutured in position (C). with a split skin graft applied to the secondary defect. and the appearance (0) 14 days after the transfer of the flap.The final result (E) after division and insetting of the flap.",
"bind the skin of the neutral line to the side of each phalanx. Their division frees the skin of the neutral line and adds considerably to the mobility and reach of the flap itself. The pedicle of the flap is divided at 2 weeks. If it is felt that the attachment of the flap is too tenuous for comfort, insetting can be postponed for a further week.",
"V-Y flaps Following a guillotine amputation it may be possible to cover the fingertip defect by advancing distally a V-shaped flap of the pulp skin, approximating the skin on either side to close the residual pulp defect (Fig. 11.22). The",
"effect is to convert the initial V of the flap into a Y-shaped suture line.",
"The V is designed on the pulp skin so that its apex reaches almost to the distal interphalangeal crease, and the width of its base distally should equal that of the nail. The incision along the through skin alone. limbs of Thereafter, sharp-pointed scissors are thrust carefully into the pulp fat and, gently opened, mobilise the flap without destroying its nerve and vascular attachment to the proximal finger. Freeing of the flap deeply is carried out by dividing its fibrous attachment to the distal phalanx and the distal fibrous flexor sheath close the flap is to these structures. Mobilised,",
"the V goes",
"210 FUNDAMENTAL TECHNIQUES OF PLASTIC SURGERY",
"Fig. I 1.21 The middle finger can be a potential donor for a cross-finger flap to the thumb, depending on the site of the defect and its extent, as demonstrated by the ease of the position when the two are placed together.",
"advanced distally and sutured to the margins of the pulp defect with fine sutures. Suturing around each side of the flap proceeds until the lines meet at the apex of the V and continues proximally, converting the suture line into a Y.",
"An alternative version (Fig. 11.23) of the technique makes use of two side-based flaps similarly advanced using the V-Y principle. With both versions it may be necessary to trim sharp edges of the exposed distal phalanx to facilitate the transfer.",
"Both techniques are best carried out under magnification, to ensure that the neurovascular bundles are demonstrated to be intact, and before either can be used there must be no element of devitalising crushing. Enough soft tissue of the phalangeal segment should also remain to allow a flap, or flaps, of adequate size to be constructed, capable of allowing closure free of tension. The single flap works best when the injury is an oblique slicing one which leaves more pulp than nail. The double flap is more effective when the obliquity leaves less pulp",
"Fig. 11.22 The V-Y pulp advancement flap, as applied to a guillotine amputation of the finger-tip, showing the various steps in the technique.",
"The flap is really neurovascular and the mobilisation necessary to achieve the required degree ofadvancement is best carried out under magnification. The method works best when the obliquity ofthe injury leaves moreofthe pulp than the nail.",
"than nail, but each of the two flaps is smaller than the single flap, and this increases the possibility of necrosis as a result of too much undermining.",
"SENSORY FACTORS INTHE USE OF FLAPS",
"A factor in assessing the usefulness of the various flaps which have been described, and one which has not received the emphasis it deserves, concerns the sensation which they eventually develop. Different areas of the hand vary in the sensory demands which the patient places on them. The important areas are the pulp segments, and in this the different fingers vary in comparative importance. Thumb and index finger in their normally apposing surfaces, the 'pinch sites', are of prime significance. Thereafter",
"HAND SURGERY 211",
"Fig.II.23 BilateralV-Y (Kuder) advancement flaps, used to provide skin cover for a guillotine amputation of the fingertip.",
"Each of the two flaps is smaller than the single flap shown in Figure I 1.22, and the addedpotential for loss of one or both of the flaps makes the desirability of carrying out the undermining and mobilisation under magnification even greater. The method works best when the obliquity of the amputation leaves more ofthe nail than the pulp.",
"comparative importance diminishes from the radial to the ulnar side of the hand, subject to the proviso that the ulnar side of the little finger is comparatively important. The radial side of the other fingers is more important than the ulnar, this side being the one most likely to be used in prehensile movements.",
"While the relative importance of these sites is valid in the normal hand, they need to be appraised afresh in the mutilated hand, and the assessment should be reflected in the selection of the donor and recipient sites for any island flap which may be contemplated.",
"The originators of free flaps seldom fail to stress the presence of a nerve supply in the flap they are describing, which has the potential for use in providing sensation in its transferred site, but the quality of sensation achieved, as far as value in hand function is concerned, is generally poor. In the areas of greatest demand, where it really matters, it would be of little value.",
"in the bed of the flap and the severity of the scarring present at the interface between flap and bed. At best it is unlikely to be more than protective. Its functional adequacy depends of course on the site, and the demands put on it. In the most demanding areas, the pinch sites, its quality even at best is not remotely adequate. It that is neurovascular island flaps (p. 188) have proved such a valuable adjunct to the conventional flaps transferred to the pulp areas of the thumb and tactile index discrimination is less important, and protective sensation is sufficient, the amount which returns may be adequate, though return cannot be guaranteed. It is wise to warn the patient to be careful, and avoid burning the flap while it lacks sensation.",
"for",
"this",
"reason,",
"among",
"others,",
"finger.",
"In",
"areas where",
"The return of sensation in those flaps which have to rely for reinnervation on the ingrowth of axons and is extremely variable. It depends, marginal, among other things, on the quota of nerve fibres",
"from its",
"surroundings, deep",
"POSTOPERATIVE CARE",
"Following a surgical procedure in the hand, a period of immobilisation is generally desirable, and this is provided by the dressing, invariably",
"111 FUNDAMENTAL TECHNIQUES OF PLASTIC SURGERY",
"reinforced by plaster of Paris. At the same time measures should be taken to prevent oedema developing in the hand.",
"POSITIONING OFTHE HAND",
"When the hand has to be immobilised, it should be in a position which will allow a full range of rapidly and to be restored as movement completely as possible. The position frequently recommended is the so-called position of function - the position which the hand takes up in holding a glass. When the immobility is for a short period, e.g. following the appli- cation of a skin graft, this is adequate, but when immobilisation is to be for a longer period, is preferable to immobilise the hand with the metacarpophalangeal joints flexed and the interphalangeal joints extended - the position of immobilisation.",
"e.g.",
"after",
"tendon grafting,",
"it",
"Positioning of the hand is often discussed solely in terms of the finger joints, but the position of the wrist can be just as important, because of the strong influence which it has on the positions the fingers take up spontaneously. It exerts its influence through the effect which extremes of flexion and extension have on the relative tensions of the long extensors and flexors in the forearm. With the wrist extended, the natural tendency of the metacarpophalangeal joints is to move into flexion; with the wrist flexed, the metacarpo- the tendency is for phalangeal joints to move into extension.",
"When the hand develops oedema, the wrist tends the most comfortable position, and fingers take up the undesirable position of metacarpophalangeal joints in extension and interphalangeal joints in flexion (Fig. 11.24). This position is one which must be countered as quickly as possible, since it fixes with disturbing speed and, once fully established, can be corrected only with difficulty, and often only partially. The surgeon thinking in terms of prevention should make extension of the wrist his first step, and the same is true of correction if the situation has been allowed to arise.",
"to drop into flexion as",
"DRESSING OF THE HAND",
"If a graft has been used, is usually wise, regardless of the site, to immobilise the entire hand in the position of function.",
"it",
"The areas of maximum hazard lie over the metacarpophalangeal joints, and to a lesser extent over the proximal interphalangeal joints, in particular forming a marked the former is in flexion. prominence when the finger Withdrawal from extreme flexion reduces the prominence, and it is for this reason that the position of function is preferable to the position of immobilisation when the area is being grafted. careful padding of the whole hand, in the webs and between the fingers, must be carried out before applying the circumferential crepe bandages. The aim in padding is to convert the hand into a cylinder so that pressure is evenly distributed. , Failure to pad the palm and dorsum adequately causes undue pressure on the radial and ulnar sides of the hand, and sores can result. The fingertips are left visible to indicate the vascular state of the hand.",
"Following the tie-over dressing,",
"When no graft has been used, absolute immobilisation may be less necessary, and the regimen can be suitably relaxed.",
"The positioning required to get a flap to lie properly may be unsuitable from the point of view of joint function, and this may have to be accepted as a hazard. Awareness of the fact that the position is not the ideal one will at least remind the surgeon to maintain it for the shortest possible time, and redouble his en- couragement to subsequent mobilisation of the joints. The problem is less likely to arise when the forearm has provided the flap, whether free or pedicled.",
"PREVENTION OF OEDEMA",
"Oedema fluid provides the raw material of stiff fingers, and elevation of the hand is used with the aim of reducing its occurrence or preventing it completely. An exception to this is the hand where a free flap has been used in the reconstruction, when positioning on a pillow at",
"HAND SURGERY 213",
"Fig. I 1.24 The position of immobilisation. A The hand at the time of referral, 10 days after a crush-degloving injury, showing the adverse effects of failure to position the hand properly, allowing the wrist to become flexed. and the metacarpophalangeal joints to extend to an undesirable extent, with associated flexion of the interphalangeal joints, particularly the proximal joints. Skin loss was confined to the area obviously present at the level of the wrist joint.",
"B The appearance after debridement of the area of skin loss and split skin grafting, with full function.",
"An initial general anaesthetic was necessary to correct the wrist flexion, and this, followed by a regimen of vigorous active finger exercises,prevented",
"the original position ofthe fingers from stiffening into permanency.",
"approximately the level of the heart is more appropriate.",
"Whatever the method used, the plaster must not be allowed to hang free and constrict the wrist.",
"Various methods are used to achieve the elevation. A well-padded plaster of Paris cast encircling the arm as far proximally as the upper humerus, so that weight is taken on the upper arm and not on the wrist and hand, may be used, but its weight tends to make it unpopular with the patient. The plaster may be confined to below the elbow and the elbow supported on a pillow, suspension merely keeping it vertical. Suspension with Tubegauz works equally well, and can be extended up the arm to the axilla so that any traction is spread as widely as possible.",
"In more minor procedures elevation on a pillow or in a sling without plaster of Paris is adequate. The sling should be such that the hand is as high as is consistent with comfort.",
"When a distant flap has been used, elevation is naturally not possible, and its role as a prophylactic against oedema should then be replaced by a vigorous regimen of active ex- ercises, every joint not of necessity immobilised being regularly put through a full range. If such a regimen is applied dependency is less likely to create problems.",
"Index",
"Page numbers in italics refer to figures.",
"A Abbe-Estlander flap, 169, 170 Abbe flap, 165, 168 Abdomen",
"skin blood supply, 65, 66 as skin donor site, 40",
"Adhesive paper tape, 17-18, 19 Age",
"hypertrophic scarring and, 127 see also Children; Older adults Alginate dressings, skin graft dono",
"sites, 48-9",
"Alopecia, see Baldness Amputation",
"finger, 185, 186 finger-tip, 190 guillotine, see Guillotine amputation lower limb, 149, 152 pinna of ear, 181",
"Anastomosis, vascular, seeVascular",
"anastomosis",
"Antecubital fossa, as skin donor",
"site, 40",
"Anterior interosseous artery, 112-13 Anterior tibial vessels, 68-9,117-18 Antibiotics, 51 Antiseptics, topical, 51 Argon lasers, 123 Arm",
"flap transfer to, 81 skin blood supply, 66-8 skin graft donor sites, 42, 44, 45 see also Forearm; Hand; Upper arm",
"Arteries",
"anastomosis, see Vascular anastomosis spasm, 104, 105, 109, 110 Arteriography, 102, 118, 148 Asian patients, hypertrophic scars/keloids, 127",
"Avulsion injuries, hand, 185-9 Axial pattern flaps, 64, 70, 91-3",
"delayed transfer, 77-8 design, 73",
"in hand surgery, 199,200-1 necrosis, 73 seealso Deltopectoral flap; Groin flap;",
"Hypogastric flap",
"Axillary vessels, 96",
"B Back-cuts",
"in fasciocutaneous flaps, 94 in rotation flaps, 87-8 in transposition flaps, 87",
"Baldness",
"scar placement and,S, 159-60 tissue expansion, 121",
"Basal cell carcinoma, 155, 172 Biopsy, radiation injuries, 132, 133 Black patients, hypertrophic scars/keloids, 127",
"Blair knife, 43 Bleeding",
"controlling, see Haemostasis from skin graft donor sites, 46 Blood supply, see Vascularisatiori/",
"vascularity",
"Blood vessels",
"anastomosis, see Vascular anastomosis in crush injuries of hands,184 dilators, 105 in free flaps, 71, 72 handling, 103-4",
"Bolus grafting, 52-3, 57-8,199 Bone",
"excision, in ischial pressure",
"sores, 141",
"injuries, see Fractures skin grafts onto, 37, 39 as tumour barrier, 154 vascularised transfer, 117-20 seealso Osteofasciocutaneous flaps;",
"Osteomyocutaneous flaps",
"Bonney's Blue, 15, 41, 164 Breast carcinoma, 153 Breast reconstruction, 153",
"rectus abdominis flaps, 99,100,101,",
"153",
"tissue expansion for, 121, 122, 153",
"Bridge segment, flaps, 61",
"elimination of raw surface, 77 in face and scalp, 158-9 Tripier flap, 170, 171",
"Bridging phenomenon, skin grafts, 39 Bridle scars, 31-3 Brown dermatome, 47 Burns",
"contracted scars, 25, 27 hypertrophic scars/keloids, 128-30 skin grafting, 47, 50-1, 55-6 wound infections, 50-1 Buttock skin flaps, for sacra",
"pressure sores, 136-7 Buttonholing, in Dupuytren's",
"contracture, 194-5",
"C Carrel triangulation, in vascular anastomosis, 106-7, 108",
"Carriers, distant flaps, 62 Cartilage",
"excision, 178, 180 skin grafts onto, 37, 39 as tumour barrier, 154, 180-1",
"Catgut, 14, 191 Cheeks, reconstruction of defects,",
"159--60",
"Chest",
"omental flaps, 111 skin blood supply, 64, 65",
"Children",
"facial scar revision, 31 finger-tip injuries, 190 scar placement, 3, 5 vascularised fibular transfer, 118",
"Chloramphenicol ointment, 18 Chlorhexidine, 51 Circumflex scapular vessels, 65, 96,",
"116,117",
"215",
"216 INDEX",
"Cleft lip defects, 165 Cleland's skin ligaments, 206, 208 Common peroneal nerve, 119 Contractures",
"bowstring, 26, 28 diffuse, 26 Dupuytren's, 193, 194-6 finger web, ,ee Finger web",
"contractures prevention, 21 scars on hands, 191 skin grafts, 36, 59, 198, 199 Z-plasty treatment, 21, 22-4, 25-8",
"Crane principle, 207 Cross-arm flaps, 81, 84",
"in hand surgery, 203, 204, 205 Cross-finger flaps, 81, 84, 205-9 Cross-leg flaps, 81, 82, 94",
"elimination of raw surfaces, 77 in skin-bone injuries, 147",
"Crushing injuries finger-tip, 190 hands, 183, 184-5 Curving scars, 33-4 Cutting injuries, hands, 184",
"D Dead space, avoiding, 17 Decubitus ulcers, seePressure sores Degloving injuries",
"foot, 152 fractures with, 146-7 hand,185-9 hypertrophic scars/keloids, 128-30 limbs, 143-5",
"Delayed exposed grafting, 53-5, 71 Delay principle",
"in flap transfer, 62, 73, 77-9, 84 in hand injuries, 186, 190",
"Deltopectoral flap, 91-2",
"elimination of raw surfaces, 77 in hand surgery, 200, 201 in head and neck defects, 155, 159 pectoralis major flaps and, 98 transfer methods, 79, 92 vascular basis, 65, 91",
"Dermatome, power-driven, 46-7 Direct flaps, 79-84",
"division and insetting, 82-4 hands, 199 transfer methods, 81-2",
"Dirt, removal of, 5, 8, 9 Distant flaps, 61,62",
"carriers, 62 dela yed transfer, 62 in finger defects, 205, 206, 207 in hand defects, 199-201, 213 in head and neck reconstruction, 155 transfer methods, 62",
"Dog-ears, 15-16",
"in rotation flaps, 88, 89",
"Doppler ultrasound, 94 Drag, in skin graft cutting, 45 Drainage, suction, see Suction drainage Dressings, 17-18",
"hands, 212 pressure, seePressure dressings skin graft donor sites, 48-9 skin-grafted areas, 53 skin graft recipient sites, 51",
"Dupuytren's contracture, 193, 194-6",
"E Ear",
"direct suture of defects, 179-80 posterior skin grafts, seePostauricular",
"skin grafts",
"prostheses, 155, 156, 181 skin tumours, 179-81 soft-tissue injuries, 5 V-excision/direct closure, 181 Elastoplast immobilisation, in flap",
"transfer, 81, 82",
"Elevation, postoperative, hands,",
"212-13",
"EMLA,42 Emollient cream, 49 Escherichia coli, 51 Exercises, active, 213 Exposed grafting technique, 53-5, 58",
"muscle flaps, 71",
"External fixation, fractures, 146 Eyebrow, scar placement.f Eyelids, 170-4",
"as skin donor sites, 39, 40, 42 skin grafts, 40, 41,52, 170, 172 Tripier flap, 170-2 V-excision. 172, 174; and direct",
"closure, 173,174;and lateral canthoto my, 173, 174; and transposed flap, 173,174",
"F Face",
"bolus grafting, 53 direct suture, 156-7 errors in wound management, 8, 9 full thickness skin grafts, 39, 40 local flaps, 85, 90, 157-9 reconstruction of defects, 159-79 scar behaviour, 4 scar placement, 3, 4-5 scar revision, 21, 28-31 skin blood supply, 63-4 skin and fasciocutaneous flaps, 74, 75 soft-tissue injuries, 5, 6, 7, 8 undercutting, 9, 10",
"Facial artery, 63, 64 Fan flap",
"bilateral, ]65, 166 neurovascular (Karapandzic), 165, 167 single, 165, 166",
"Fascia",
"flaps, 114 free skin grafts onto, 37 Fasciectomy, in Dupuytren's contracture, 194-6",
"Fasciocutaneous flaps, 61, 70,93-4",
"free transfer, 71 for infected fractures, 150",
"raising, 74 in skin-bone limb injuries,147 vascular insufficiency, 72 seealsoAxial pattern flaps; Random pattern flaps",
"Fat",
"free skin grafts onto, 37 liposuction, 122 trimming, 41, 42, 75, 76 Fenestration, skin grafts, 58-9 Fibrin, 36, 38 Fibrosis, in hand injuries, 183, 184-5 Fibular transfer, vascularised, 117-20",
"bone alone, 118, 119-20 bone-skin composite, 118,119,120 clinical usage, 120 raising flap, 118-20",
"Finger(s)",
"amputation, 185, 186 degloving injuries, 186 guillotine amputation, 184 placing scars, 191, 192 reconstruction of defects, 205-10 sensation, 210-11 skin grafts, 198",
"Finger forehead flap, 176, 177, 179 Finger-tip",
"guillotine amputation, 209-10, 211 injuries, 184, 189-90 V-Yflaps, 209-10",
"Finger web contractures",
"cross-arm flaps, 203, 205 secondary to skin grafts, 198 Z-plasty method, 196, 197",
"Flaps, 61-120 base, 61 bridge segment, see Bridge segment,",
"flaps",
"debulking using liposuction, 122 distal segment, 61, 62 eliminating raw surfaces, 76-7 in finger-tip injuries, 190 geometry, 72 in hand surgery, 184, 199-211 in head and neck reconstruction,",
"155, 156",
"for infected fractures, 150 necrosis, 73-5 nomenclature, 61-2 for pressure sores, 136-41 traumatic, 5, 7 types, 69-72 vascular anatomy, 62-9 vascular insufficiencv, 72-3 Z-plasty, 25 seealso Specific typesoffillps and IIIIII/ed",
"'",
"flaps",
"Flavine wool, 53 Flexures",
"scar placement, 3 as skin donor sites, 40",
"Fluorescein, for assessing skin",
"circulation, 144",
"Foot",
"as glabrous skin source, 198, ] 99",
"mixed skin-bone injuries, 149 plantar defects, 151-2 ,;\"\"alsoHeel; Toes",
"Foot-drop, 149 Forceps, dissecting, 10 Forearm",
"flaps,94,112-14,202 skin blood supply, 67-8 as skin donor site, 42",
"Forehead",
"direct suture, 157 flaps, 75, 158,176,177, 179 reconstruction of defects, 159-60 skin tumour excision, 157, 159 Foreign material, removal of, 5, 8, 9 Fractures, 145-9 fixation, 145-6 infected,149-50 provision of skin cover, 146-8 soft-tissue management, 148-9",
"Free flaps, 61, 71-2, 102-20",
"in hand surgery, 202, 211, 212-13 in head and neck defects, 159 for infected fractures, 150 necrosis, 73, 75 omental, 111 in scalp defects, 161 in skin-bone limb injuries, 148, 149 transfer techniques, 104 vascular anastomosis, see Vascular anastomosis",
"vascular anatomy, 102 vascular insufficiency, 73",
"Free skin grafts, seeSkin grafts, free Full thickness skin grafts, 35, 36, 39-42",
"application, 52 in degloving injuries, 144 donor sites, 36, 39-40 in eyelid defects, 40, 41, 52,170,172 in finger-tip injuries, 190 in hand surgery, 40, 197, 198 method of use, 40-2 in plantar defects, 152",
"G Galea aponeurotica, 10, 159, 161 Gastrocnemius flaps, 95-6 Glabellar advancement flap, 177, 179 Glabellar flap, 175, 179 Glabrous skin donor sites, 198, 199 Gluteus maximus myocutaneous flaps,",
"137,138",
"Granulation(s),50-2",
"bacterial flora, 50-1 clinical appearance, 50 in hand injuries, 183 preparation for grafting, 51-2 of skin graft donor sites, 48, 49 skin grafting techniques, 55-6 in skin graft take, 37",
"Groin",
"defects, 100 as skin donor site, 40 skin grafting, 53",
"Groin flap, 92-3",
"clinical usage, 93 elimination of raw surfaces, 77 in hand surgery, 200-1, 206, 207 transfer, 79, 80 vascular basis, 66, 92, 93",
"Guillotine amputation",
"fingers, 184 finger-tips, 209-10,211",
"H Haemangioma, 122-3 Haernatoma, 16-17",
"flap necrosis and, 73-4 management, 17 prevention, 17,49-50,52,53-4,76 skin graft take and, 38",
"Haemostasis",
"in finger-tip injuries, 190 graft recipient areas, 49-50, 53-4, 58-9",
"Hair",
"removal, 123 scar placement and,S, 159-60",
"Hand, 183-213",
"degloving injuries, 185-9 direct closure, 190-1 dressings, 212 flaps, 184, 199-211; defects distal to webs, 205-10; defects proximal to webs, 203; preparation of defect, 202-3; sensory factors, 210-11; transfer methods, 81, 82",
"injuries, 183-90;",
"tidy and untidy, 183; types, 183-90",
"oedema prevention, 212-13 positioning, 212 postoperative care, 211-13 repair I reconstruction techniques,",
"190-211",
"scar placement, 191, 192 skin grafts, 40, 184, 185, 197-9 suturing techniques, 191 Z-plasty techniques, 19Hi, 197 seealsoFingerts): Palmar skin; Thumb",
"Head",
"reconstruction techniques, 156-81 skin graft donor sites, 38 skin tumours, 154-81 seealsoEar; Face; Forehead; Scalp",
"Healing",
"pressure sores, 135 skin graft donor sites, 36, 47-8 wound,3-4",
"Heel",
"defects, 151, 152 pressure sores, 135, 136",
"Humby knife, 43-6, 51",
"Watson modification, 43, 45",
"Hyaluronidase, 42 Hypertrophic scars /keloids, 3, 30, 127-30",
"clinical picture, 127-8, 129 management, 123, 128-30 in skin donor areas, 49",
"Hypogastric flap, 93",
"in hand surgery, 200-1 vascular basis, 66, 93",
"INDEX 217",
"I Iliotibial tract, 138 Immobilisa tion",
"in flap transfer, 81-2 free skin grafts, 38, 52, 53 in hand surgery, 199, 202, 211-13 pressure sores and, 135-11",
"Incisions",
"in hand surgery, 191, 192, 193 placing, 3, 4-5 relaxation, 10, 146-7, 161",
"Infections",
"flaps, prevention, 76-7 fractures, 149-50 free flaps and, 102 in hand injuries, 183 in limb trauma, 143 skin graft donor sites, 49 skin graft recipient sites, 50-1 traumatic wounds, 17 Inferior epigastric vessels, 66, 101",
"Infraorbital artery, 64 Intercostal vascular system, 64, 65, 66 Intermuscular septa, 68, 69 Internal fixation, fractures, 146 Internal mammary artery, 91 Intramedullary nail fixation, 146 Ischaemia",
"radiation-induced,131-2 time, 102 seealsoVascular insufficiency",
"Ischial pressure sores, 136, 137, 139-41 Island flaps, 62",
"neurovascular, 187, 188-9,211",
"Itching",
"hypertrophic scars/keloids, 127, 130 skin graft donor sites, 48, 49",
"J Junction lines, natural, 5",
"K Kaltostat dressings, 48-9 Karapandzic (neurovascular) fan flap,",
"165, 167",
"Keloids, see Hypertrophic scars/keloids Kinking, skin and fasciocutaneous flaps,",
"72",
"Kramer wire, 54 Kutler (bilateral V-Y) advancement",
"flaps, 210, 211",
"L Labial arteries, 162 Lasers, 122-3 Lateral canthotomy, 173, 174 Lateral cutaneous nerve of arm, 115 Lateral femoral circumflex vessels, 139 Lateral thoracic artery, 97, 98 Lateral upper arm flap, 68,114-16",
"clinical usage, 116, 202 raising, 115-16",
"Latissimus dorsi flaps, 95, 96-7",
"free, 97 in skin-bone limb injuries, 148",
"218 INDEX",
"Limbs",
"contracted scars, 25 degloving injuries, see Degloving",
"injuries",
"skin blood supply, 66-9 skin-bone injuries, 145-9 skin donor sites, 42, 43-5 skin and fasciocutaneous flaps, 74,",
"75-6",
"transposed and rotated flaps, 86, 91 trauma, 143-52 undercutting, 10 see also Arm; Hand;",
"Lower limb",
"Lines of election, 3, 4, 28 Lipoma, 122 Liposuction, 122 Lips",
"fan flap, seeFan flap reconstruction techniques, 162-70 wedge excision/direct closure, 164,",
"165 Lip-shave, 162",
"deep, with tongue flap, 162, 163 lip resection with, 164 Lip-switch flap, 165, 168 modified,169,170 Liquid paraffin, 45, 47 Local anaesthesia",
"for liposuction, 122 skin graft donor sites, 42, 48",
"Local anaesthetics, for vascular spasm,",
"104, 109",
"Local flaps, 61, 62, 84-91",
"in finger defects, 205-10 foot injuries, 152 hands, 199 head and neck, 155, 157-9 in nose reconstruction, 175, 176, 177,",
"178-9",
"see also Rotation flaps; Transposition",
"flaps Lower leg",
"fasciocutaneous flaps, 94 skin-bone injuries, 149",
"Lower limb",
"flap transfer to, 81, 82 skin blood supply, 68-9 see also Foot; Lower leg; Thigh",
"M McCash open palm method, 196 Mandible, reconstruction of, 114 Mastectomy, breast reconstruction after,",
"see Breast reconstruction Medial canthal defects, 172, 177 Melanoma, malignant, 154 Mental artery, 64 Mesh grafting, 56-8 muscle flaps, 71",
"Microclamps, 103, 107-8 Micropore tape, 17-18, 19, 190 Microscope, 104 Microvascular surgery, 102-10",
"in hand injuries, 183, 186, 189",
"see also Vascular anastomosis",
"Multiple sclerosis, pressure sores, 135,",
"136",
"Muscle",
"free skin grafts onto, 37",
"injuries, 144, 145 Muscle flaps, 61, 70-1, 95-102",
"in skin-bone limb injuries, 147-8 vascular insufficiency, 72",
"Myocutaneous flaps, 61, 70-1, 95-102",
"free transfer, 71 for infected fractures, 150 necrosis, 73 for pressure sores, 137, 138-9 in skin-bone limb injuries, 147-8 vascular basis, 63, 65 vascular insufficiency, 72",
"N Nail/nail-bed injuries, 189-90 Nasolabial flap, 178, 179 Nasolabial fold, defects in, 159 Neck",
"local flaps, 158 reconstruction techniques, 156-81 scar placement, 3, 4 skin blood supply, 64 skin graft donor sites, 38 skin tumours, 154-81 webbing, 27",
"Necrosis",
"in degloving injuries, 144 flap, 73 radiation-induced, 131, 132 rim, 82-4",
"Needle",
"insertion/pull-through technique, 11 management, in microvascular",
"surgery, 107, 109",
"Neoplasia, 153-81",
"breast carcinoma, 153 head and neck skin, 154-81 radiation-associated, 131, 132-3",
"Nerve",
"in free flaps, 71 injuries, 151",
"Neurovascular island flap, 211",
"degloved thumb repair, 187, 188-9 Neurovascular (Karapandzic) fan flap,",
"165, 167",
"Neutral line, in hand surgery, 191, 193 Nose",
"direct suture, 177-8 prostheses, 155, 156 reconstruction of defects, 175, 176,",
"177-9",
"scar behaviour, 4",
"a Oedema",
"free flaps, 110 hand,184-5,212-13",
"Older adults",
"rotation flap use, 90 scar placement, 3, 4",
"split skin grafts, 46",
"Omental flaps, 111 Open palm method, McCash, 196 Oral cavity, quilted grafting, 58-9 Orthopaedic surgery, 145-6 Osteitis, 149-50 Osteocutaneous flap, vascularised",
"fibula, 118,119, 120 Osteofasciocutaneous flaps",
"lateral upper arm, 114-15, 116 radial forearm, 113-14 scapular, 117",
"Osteomyocutaneous flaps, 61, 71 Overriding scars, 33, 34",
"p Padding, hands, 212 Pain, skin graft donor sites, 48 Palmar skin",
"degloving injuries, 185 direct closure, 190-1 skin grafts, 198, 199 suturing techniques, 191",
"Papaverine, for vascular spasm, 104, 109 Paraplegia, pressure sores, 136-41 Para scapular flap, 116, 117 Parotid gland tumours, 159 Pectoralis major flaps, 97-8 Pectoral tubed flap, degloved thumb,",
"187,188",
"Pedicled flaps, 61, 62, 79-84",
"division and insetting, 82-4 in hand surgery, 199-201 mechanisms of transfer, 79-82 omental, III staged division, 78-9 Pencil holding grip, 103 Perforating blood vessels, 62-3, 64-5,",
"67-9,94,99-100",
"Periadventitia, removal, 103, 104, 105 Perineum",
"defects of, 100 pressure sores, 141",
"Periosteum",
"management, 145, 148 role of, 145",
"Peroneal vessels, 68-9, 94,117-18,119 Pilosebaceous apparatus, 36, 47 Pinna, seeEar Pivot point, 62, 72",
"rotation flaps, 87-8 transposition flaps, 86 vagueness,88,89,160 Planning in reverse, 62, 72 Plaster of Paris immobilisation",
"in flap transfer, 81, 82 in hand surgery, 211-12, 213 in secondary defect management, 114",
"in skin-bone injuries, 146 skin-grafted areas, 53 Plate fixation, fractures, 146 Popliteal vessels, 95 Port wine stain, 122-3 Position of function, hands, 212",
"Position of immobilisation, hands, 212,",
"213",
"Postauricular skin grafts, 39, 41, 42 in eyelid defects, 40,170,174 in nose defects, 178",
"Posterior cutaneous nerve of arm, 115 Posterior interosseous flap, 199, 201, 202 Posterior interosseous vessels, 67 Posterior tibial vessels, 68-9, 94,118,119 Postoperative care, 17-19",
"free flaps, 11\u00b0",
"hand surgery, 211-13 Pressure dressings, 17, 51",
"hypertrophic scars/keloids, 130 skin grafts, 52-3, 57-8,199",
"Pressure sores, 135--41",
"non-paraplegic, 135-6 paraplegic, 136-41",
"Primary defect, 61 Profunda brachii artery, 68, 115 Prostheses",
"ear, 155, 156, 181 in head and neck defects, 155, 156",
"Proteus mirabilis, 51 Pseudomonas aeruginosa, 49, 50-1",
"Q Quilted grafting, 58-9",
"R Radial artery, 67-8, 94, 112 Radial collateral artery, 114-15 Radial forearm flap, 94,112-14",
"clinical usage, 114 fascial, 114 fasciocutaneous, 112-13 in hand surgery, 199,201,202 osteofasciocutaneous, 113-14 secondary defect management, 114 vascular basis, 68, 112, 113",
"Radial nerve, 115, 116 Radiation injury, 131-3",
"free flaps, 102 skin grafting, 38, 51 Radiodermatitis, 131, 132 Radionecrosis, 131, 132 Random pattern flaps, 70",
"delayed transfer, 73, 77, 78, 79 necrosis, 73",
"Raw surfaces, flaps, eliminating, 76-7 Recharging, 102 Rectus abdominis flaps, 95, 98-102",
"in breast reconstruction, 99, 100, 101,",
"153",
"free, 100, 101 inferiorly based, 99, 101 muscle, 100 myocutaneous, 100-1 perfusion of skin island, 101-2 in skin-bone limb injuries, 148 superiorly based, 99, 100-1",
"Rectus sheath, 66, 98-9 Relaxation incisions, 10, 146-7, 161 Rhomboid flap, 160, 161 Rotation flaps, 61, 84-91",
"clinical usage, 90-1 in hand surgery, 203 head and neck, 90, 158, 159-60 planning, 84-5, 87-90 in scalp defects, 90, 161",
"S Sacral pressure sores, 136-7 Salivary fistula, 156 Scalp",
"blood supply, 63--4 local flaps, 85, 87, 90, 158, 161 omental flaps, 111 reconstruction of defects, 161 scar placement, 5 skin and fasciocutaneous flaps, 74, 75 skin tumour excision, 159 tissue expansion, 121, 122, 161 undercutting, 9-10 wounds, 5",
"Scapular flaps, 116-17 horizontal, 116,117 parascapular, 116, 117 vascular basis, 65, 116",
"Scars, 3",
"bridle, 31-3 contracted, seeContractures curving, 33--4 hypertrophic, seeHypertrophic",
"scars/keloids",
"length,15-16 overriding, 33, 34 placing, 4-5; in face, 3, 4-5; in hand,",
"191,192,193",
"red, 3, 31 revision of facial, 28-31 stretching, 3 tattooed, 8, 9, 123 trap-door, 32, 33--4 variations in behaviour, 3--4 Screw fixation, fractures, 146 Scrotal pressure sores, 141 Sebaceous gland activity, 4,177 Secondary defect, 61",
"axial pattern flaps, 91-2, 93 closure methods, 76-7 fasciocutaneous flaps, 94 radial forearm flap, 114 rectus abdominis flaps, 101 rotation flaps, 89, 90 transposition flaps, 87",
"Sensory loss",
"in degloved thumb, 188 in flaps used in hands, 210-11 in weightbearing area of foot, 149",
"Seroma, management of, 59 Sex differences",
"hypertrophic scars/keloids, 127 nasolabial flaps, 179 pectoralis major flaps, 98",
"Shoulder, frozen, 117 Silicone",
"breast implants, 121, 153 gel, in keloid therapy, 128",
"Silk sutures, 14",
"INDEX 219",
"Silver knife, 43 Skin",
"atrophic, graft cutting and, 46 blood supply, 62-9 burying degloved digit under, 186,",
"188",
"cleansing/ sterilising agents, 6 colour; assessing, 5-6; donor sites, 49 cover, in skin-bone injuries, 146-8 degloved, viability, 143--4, 186 eversion, for suturing, 12, 13 increasing area available, 121 injury, in bony trauma, 145 plantar, 151 sun-damaged, 155",
"Skin-bone injuries, limbs, 145-9 Skin flaps, 61, 70, 75-9",
"avoidance of infection, 76-7 for pressure sores, 136-7, 139--40 raising, 74, 75 in skin-bone limb injuries, 147 thinning, 75-6 tubing, 75 use of delay, 77-9 vascular insufficiency, 72 seealsoAxial pattern flaps; Random",
"pattern flaps Skin grafts, free, 35-59 application, 52-9 donor area, 47-9; healing, 36, 47-8;",
"management, 48-9",
"exposed methods, 53-5, 58 in eyelid defects, 40, 41, 52,170,172 in finger-tip injuries, 190 full thickness, seeFull thickness skin",
"grafts",
"on granulating areas, 50-2, 55-6 in hand surgery, 40,184,185,197-9 in head and neck reconstruction, 155 meshed, 56-8, 71 in nose defects, 178 pressure methods, 52-3, 57-8 quilted, 58-9 recipient sites, 37-8, 49-52 seroma formation, 59 in skin-bone limb injuries, 147, 148-9 split, seeSplit skin grafts on surgically clean surfaces, 49-50 take, 36-9 thickness variations, 38 vascularity, 38",
"Skin hooks, 10, 12, 13 Skin tumours, 153--4",
"head and neck, 154-81; cosmetic problems, 155-6; pathological aspects, 154-5; reconstruction techniques, 156-81",
"Slicing injuries",
"finger-tip, 190 hands, 184",
"Slough",
"formation, 144-5, 186 removal, 51",
"Split skin grafts, 35, 36, 42-7",
"application, 52",
"220 INDEX",
"Split skin grafts (COl1t)",
"cutting, 42-7; instruments, 43-7;",
"local anaesthesia for, 42 in degloving injuries, 144 donor sites, 42; bleeding pattern, 46;",
"healing, 36, 47-8 in ear tumours, 180-1 in finger-tip injuries, 190 in hand surgery, 184, 186, 197-9 meshed, 56-8, 71 muscle flaps, 71 plantar defects, 152 scalp defects, 161 secondary defects, 87 in skin-bone limb injuries, 147 for skin tumours, 153-4 storage, 47 thickness; assessment, 45-6; control, 45 translucency, 45--6",
"Squamous cell carcinoma, 155",
"ear, 179, 180 lips, 162-4",
"Stamp-sized skin grafts, 55-6 Staphylococcus aureus, 51 Steristrips, 17-18 Steroids",
"injection of keloids, 128 topical, 49, 51",
"Storage, split skin grafts, 47",
"Streptococcus pyogel1es, 38, 50",
"Submandibular area",
"reconstruction of defects, 159 rotation flaps, 90",
"Subscapular vessels, 96, 97, 116 Suction drainage, 17",
"flaps, 74, 76 in microvascular surgery, 109",
"Sun-damaged skin, 155 Supercharging, 102 Superficial circumflex iliac vessels, 66,",
"92-3",
"Superficial epigastric vessels, 66, 93 Supraclavicular skin, 39, 40 Sutures",
"blanket stitch, 13, 14 buried absorbable, 13 continuous, 11, 14 continuous intradermal, 13-14 interrupted, 11-14 marks, 9 materials, 14 muscle flaps, 71 over-and-over, 13, 14 removal, 18-19 simple loop, 11-13 three-point, 15 tissue reaction to, 18 vertical mattress, 13 wound closure without, 18",
"Suturing, 10-17",
"errors, 9 free skin grafts, 56 in hand surgery, 184, 191 head and neck defects, 156-7 instrumental method, 10, 11",
"techniques, 10-11 vascular anastomoses, 105-9",
"Sweat gland remnants, 36, 47",
"T Take, skin grafts, 36-9 Tarsal plates, 170 Tattoos",
"preoperative, 15,41, 164 removal, 123 traumatic, 8, 9, 123",
"Temperature, skin graft storage, 47 Temple",
"reconstruction of defects, 159-60, 161 skin tumour excision, 159",
"Tendon",
"injuries, 151 in muscle flaps, 71 skin grafts onto, 37, 39 Tensile strength, wounds, 3 Tension",
"distribution, 14-15 in flap transfer, 72 suturing techniques and, 13-14 in Z-plasty, 25",
"Tensor fasciae latae flaps, 138-9, 140-1 Thigh",
"as skin donor site, 40, 42, 49 skin flap, for pressure sores, 139-40 skin graft cutting from, 43-5, 46",
"Thoraco-acromial artery, 91, 97-8 Thoracodorsal vessels, 96, 116 Thrombosis, 110 Thumb",
"cross-finger flaps, 206, 208, 210 degloving injuries, 186, 187, 188-9 replacement with toe, 189 sensation, 210-11 traumatic amputation, 184, 189",
"Tibia",
"infected fractures, 149-50 mixed skin-bone injuries, 149",
"Tissue",
"expansion, 121-2; for breast",
"reconstruction, 121, 122, 153; in scalp defects, 121, 122, 161",
"handling, during suturing, 10 viability, assessing, 5--6, 185",
"Toes",
"clawing, 149 thumb replacement with, 189 weightbearing areas, 151 Tongue, quilted grafting, 58-9 Tongue flap",
"deep lip-shave with, 162, 163 fan flap with, 165, 166",
"Transposition flaps, 61, 84-91",
"clinical usage, 90-1 in eyelid defects, 173, 174 in hand surgery, 203 in nose reconstruction, 175, 176, 177,",
"178-9",
"planning, 84-7 in scalp defects, 85, 90, 161 Transverse cervical artery, 64",
"Transverse facial artery, 64 Trap-door",
"in flap transfer, 80 scars, 32, 33-4",
"Trauma",
"hand,183-90 limb,143-52 use of free flaps, 102 see also Wound(s)",
"Triamcinolone injection, 128 Triangulation",
"of defect, 84-5 in vascular anastomosis, 106-7, 108",
"Tripier flap, 170-2 Trochanteric pressure sores, 136, 138-9 Trunk",
"fasciocutaneous flaps, 94 skin blood supply, 64--6 as skin donor site, 42 skin and fasciocutaneous flaps, 74, 75,",
"76",
"skin grafting, 53 transposition flaps, 86, 90-1 undercutting, 10",
"Tubed flaps, 75,77,79-84",
"degloved thumb repair, 187, 188 division and insetting, 82-4 in hand surgery, 199, 200-1 mechanisms of transfer, 79-81",
"Tulle gras, 17, 51, 56 Tumour barriers, 154, 178, 180-1 Tumours, seeNeoplasia Tuneable dye lasers, 123 Tunnelling, muscle flaps, 71, 72 Turner's syndrome, 27",
"U Ulnar forearm flap, 68, 94, 114",
"in hand surgery, 202",
"Ulnar vessels, 67, 68 Undercutting, 9-10 Upper arm",
"flap, lateral, 68,114-16,202 skin blood supply, 68",
"V Vascular anastomosis, 102-10",
"end-to-end, 102, 103; preparation for,",
"104-5; technique, 106, 108",
"end-to-side, 102, 103; preparation for,",
"104, 105; technique, 106-7",
"instrumentation for, 103 revision, 110 in skin-bone limb injuries, 148 technique, 105-10; patency testing,",
"109; suturing sequence, 106-9; vein grafts, 109-10",
"vessel selection and preparation, 103-5",
"Vascular insufficiency",
"degloved thumb, 188 flaps, 72-3 free flaps, 110 see also Ischaemia",
"Vascularisation/vascularity",
"flaps, 62-9, 158",
"free skin grafts, 36-7, 38, 39 skin graft recipient areas, 51-2 Vascular spasm, 104, 105, 109, 110 Vein",
"anastomosis, 103, 107-8 grafts, 109-10, 183",
"Venae comitantes, 114-15 Venous thrombosis/insufficiency, 110 V-Y advancement flaps",
"bilateral, finger-tip, 210, 211 finger-tip, 209-10",
"W Willtzing transfer, 62, 79",
"clinical usage, 84 deltopectoral flap, 79, 92",
"Web contractures, finger, see Finger web",
"contractures",
"Wooden board, for skin graft cutting, 45",
"Wound(s),3-19 closure, 6-8 dressings, see Dressings errors in management, 8, 9 excisional policy, 5-6 haematoma. seeHaematoma healing, 3-4 infections, 17 postoperative care, 17-19 preparation, 5-10 scars, see Scars stitchcraft, see Suturing support after suture removal, 19 tension, 14-15 undercutting, 9-10",
"Wrinkle lines, 3, 4, 30, 156-7, 191 Wrist",
"carrier, for flap transfer, 62, 80-1 position, 212, 213",
"Index compiled by Liza weinkooe",
"INDEX 221",
"Z Z-plasty, 5, 21-34 angle size, 23-4 blood supply of flaps, 25 clinical usage, 25-34 in eyelid defects, 173, 174 in facial scars, 28-31 in hand surgery, 191-6 limb length, 23, 24 in lip repair, 165 multiple, 24-6, 28; continuous, 28; in hand surgery, 193-0, 197; parallel and skew, 28",
"planning, 20-7, 29, 193-4 single, 24-5 theoretical basis, 22-5"
